# Chapter 8

General Comments
Sections:
1
General Comments
92
2
Engineering Tips
93
Acknowledgments
98

--- PAGE 5 ---
iv
Inspector’s Basic Engineering Knowledge Course
The objective of this Course is to give prospective British Gliding Association Inspectors a
grounding in basic Glider Engineering imparting sufficient knowledge enabling them to be
competent in carrying out Annual Inspections and the more complex servicing tasks that will
arise during some or all of the Annual Servicings they will undertake in the future. This
includes the use of airworthiness documents, forms and sources of technical information.
This Syllabus and Course Notes are written around the British Gliding Association’s
Assessment Statement for appraising the prospective Inspector’s Personal Experience
Record.
The course is not designed to teach basic engineering skills, use of specialised tools or
machinery to enable the Candidate to be able to carry out any significant repairs to airframe
structures, systems or engine maintenance. That training will have to be covered in separate
more intensive training courses. It does however, try and demonstrate the use of tools and
equipment required to carry out Annual Servicings and Component Changes. It also contains
some anecdotes to highlight pertinent aspects of the course.
There is to be a further element added to this initial course to cover the requirements of the
Part 66 LAE Examinations. That Course has yet to be devised and written and will no doubt
require assistance from other personnel more qualified to deliver lectures on certain subjects
– Human Factors is one subject that immediately comes to mind.
Ideally, further courses might be devised to teach repair techniques for Wood, Fabric , Metal
(if required), FRP Structures, Airframe Systems and Engines. ‘On-the-Job’ training might be
a way forward but a lot of that experience will probably have to be earned by several hours of
attendance with a suitably qualified engineer running a professional repair business.
Prospective Inspectors will have learned sufficient useful information whilst attending this
basic course with all the reference material being made readily available. The Course
Members will need to back up the theory with practical work that must be accomplished and
recorded on their Personal Experience Record.
Stu Hoy
I/A132

--- PAGE 6 ---
1
Basic Engineering Knowledge for Prospective BGA Inspectors