# Chapter 1

General Items
Section 1
Cockpit Decals and Placards:
Cockpit decals and placards are there to help the pilot know what the controls are and what
numerical limitations apply to a particular glider. Decals are not restricted to the cockpit; you
will find them on external surfaces commonly adjacent to the wheels indicating the tyre
pressure. Some are adjacent to control connections, fin pitot tubes and total energy fittings.
Flight manuals have a page or two showing the decals and placards required and their
location. These are mandatory and if found missing on an Audit it becomes a ‘Finding’ and
requires rectification and notification back to the person who has carried out the audit – BGA
or CAA. Audits also have a category of ‘Observations’. These are not serious deficiencies
and although need to be sorted out they generally do not need a written response.
Likewise ASI and occasionally Accelerometer instruments need to be correctly colour
marked in accordance with the Flight Manual. A recent BGAAudit found that the ASIs in a
K21 were missing the green arc and the Accelerometer was devoid of all the required marks.
It is very easy to miss these little things. There is also a requirement to have the glider’s
registration details adjacent to the radio so the pilot can give the correct call sign.
Some things are not necessarily called up as decals but labelling switches and fuses/circuit
breakers is always a good thing.
Limitations Placards are generated by the inspector who is maintaining the glider and/or the
inspector who weighed the glider. These placards are best printed and laminated before being
stuck into the cockpit with a decent double sided tape. Printing from Ink-Jet printers tends to
fade rather quickly, if possible use a laser printer and in either case on decent paper, say
120gsm.
General cockpit decals are available from a few suppliers or you can have your own printed
by your local friendly vinyl Sign Maker. They will print on white or coloured vinyl and add a
clear laminate to prevent the print from being rubbed off. Registration marks either in vinyl
or as a stencil for painting are also readily available.
There are choices to be made when deciding to apply registration marks and competition
numbers. The ‘G’ registration once issued to an aircraft cannot be transferred to another even
if the first aircraft gives up that registration for whatever reason – destroyed, sold abroad, or
if a new owner wants to put on a personalised registration. Therefore as the registration
cannot be transferred the mark may well be applied in paint. Vinyl lettering is cheaper and
will stick to a wax polished surface whereas to paint, the surface needs careful preparation.
Competition Numbers on the other hand are the property of the owner not the glider and so
probably best applied using vinyl lettering. That can be changed easily.

--- PAGE 7 ---
2
Gliders are required to have identifying marks, Part 21 gliders need a ‘G’ reg on the fuselage
and under the left wing and on the fin either the trigraph (BGA Issued), generally the last 3
letters of the ‘G’ reg or a competition number. Non-Part 21 gliders need a trigraph or
competition number on the fin and the BGA number in small print usually at the bottom of
the fin. I believe there is no objection to putting the trigraph or competition number under the
left wing. Additionally, gliders are to have a fire-proof plate in the cockpit showing the type,
Registration and Serial Number.
Competition numbers are issued by the BGA and have to be paid for, trigraphs are free. There
used to be 1 to 999 available but in recent years letters with or without a number have been
accepted by the BGA. The BGA Office will let you know what numbers are available or
whether your choice of letters and numerals is acceptable. Competition Numbers preceded by
‘A’, ‘R’ or ‘N’ are reserved for the Army Gliding Association, the RAFGSA and the Navy
Gliding Association.
One placard that needs an annual change is that showing the expiry dates of the Annual
Servicing, ARC and Insurance. The BGA offers their version but as a professional
organisation, Anglia Sailplanes has its own printed showing contact details. Someone did ask
if that was advertising – er, Yes!
Examples of Cockpit Decals are shown in below:

--- PAGE 8 ---
3
Self-Derived Cockpit Label
Section 2
Annual Inspection Documentation:
Old AMP Lft 1-1
In the first instance you need to know what work and inspections need to be carried out.
There are various sources of information:

Glider’s SDMP or BGA Form 267 for Non-Part 21 Gliders.

CAA CAP411/LAMS/A/1999: Issue 2, amendment 0, edition 5 for Non-Part 21
Motor Gliders. (Venture for example).

Flight and Maintenance Manuals.

Manufacturer’s Website.

BGA Compendium.

CAP 562, also known as Civil Aircraft Airworthiness Information and Procedures
(CAAIP)

CAP747, Mandatory Requirements for Aircraft.

State of Design Airworthiness Directives.

CAAAirworthiness Directives
For Reference:

FAA Summary of Airworthiness Directives: Small Aircraft, Biweekly Current Issue

EASAAirworthiness Directives.

EASAAirworthiness Directives: bi-weekly issue

CAA CAP 476 Mandatory Aircraft Modifications and Inspections Summary.
In addition Non-Part 21 gliders should have an AD Status report (Form 280) and Part 21
Gliders should have all the relevant information in the back pages of the Log Book. The
Form 280 is not a requirement for Part 21 gliders that by now ought to have the new style
BGA Log Book. However, it useful to keep a copy of the Form 280 with ALL the Tech Notes
and ADs noted. The BGA Form 280 is a Word document and cumbersome to alter so there is
a version on an Excel Spread Sheet. This is much the same in appearance but can easily be
updated and it prints out on individual numbered pages. If you would like a copy at any time
it can be downloaded from Anglia Sailplanes website, http://www.angliasailplanes.co.uk
The documentation for an Annual Servicing for a Non-Part 21 Glider would comprise:

Document Control Sheet.

BGA Form 267.

--- PAGE 9 ---
4

Work Sheet(s) – as many as necessary.

A Work Sheet for noting the ADs, TNs and BGA Inspections carried out, good idea
but a separate sheet is not strictly necessary.

A Work Sheet for recording Duplicate/Independent Inspections on critical joints and
controls. Again not strictly necessary to have a separate sheet but keeps all the
Duplicates in one place.

ASI Operational Check Sheet. We are not allowed to say ‘Calibration’ as our
manometers are usually home-made and uncalibrated.

A Work Sheet for the Control Deflections.

Maintenance Work Order.

BGA Form 280 unless using the new BGA Log Book.

If unserviceable components have been replaced by new or overhauled components
then there should be either a BGA Form 286 for Standard Unreleased Parts or
Certificate of Conformity, a Form 1 or the American Form 8130-3 Dual Release (USA
and UK). This is equivalent to the Form 1, CAA or EASA.
The Certificate of Airworthiness is renewed by the BGA on receipt of a copy of the Form 267
and the renewal fee. A C of A renewal document containing a self-adhesive cockpit label is
returned to the owner by the BGA. So that the glider can fly as soon as the documentation
has been raised and sent to the BGA the Inspector can issue a 30 Day Label. That effectively
renews the C of A for 30 Days and under normal circumstances will cover the period until the
C of A renewal is received back by the Owner. Current fees can be found on the BGA
Website.
For Part 21 Gliders the list of documents required is much the same, additions being the Form
276 – Annual Airworthiness Review, and the Airworthiness Review Certificate - ARC. The
BGA Form 267 is replaced by the SDMP Form 267. The paperwork and CRS has to be
signed by an Inspector holding a Part 66 licence and the ARC by an ARC Signatory.
Renewal of the ARC is a combined effort by the Inspector, the BGA and CAA (with the
appropriate fee being paid to the BGA). The new ARC is raised by the Inspector who then
sends copies of the BGA Form 276, the ARC and the fee to the BGA. The ARC is legal from
the time it is signed and no response will be forthcoming from the BGA unless asked for,
(space on the F276 to request an email response). There is no requirement to forward a copy
of the SDMP Form 267 to the BGA. The Aircraft Register will be updated and shown on the
G-INFO data base.
The ARC Template is formatted to automatically show the date of issue so first print a copy
to a pdf format. The hard copy can be printed from the pdf at any time. When collating the
docs for the BGA the pdf copy will not have changed the issue date and this can also be used
to reprint the ARC in the future if necessary. The Adobe Acrobat programme has the ability to
allow a signature to be added to a document. That facility is very useful for signing the Form
276 and the ARC on the computer and forwarding those pdf documents to the BGA. It saves
printing a hard copies, signing, scanning back in and then sending the documents. Keep two
pdf copies of the ARC, an unsigned one and the signed copy.
Be aware of the dating protocols of Annuals and ARCs.
Annual Servicings (or Checks) are valid for a year less a day from the date of signing so
signed on 3rd March the Servicing would expire at midnight on the 2nd March the following

--- PAGE 10 ---
5
year. Annual Servicings cannot be anticipated without loss of time – An annual completed
ahead of the expiry of the current Annual means the time period between completion and
expiry is lost.
ARCs on the other hand will also last for one year less a day but can be anticipated by 90
days. So the completion of an Annual Airworthiness Review and the issuing of a ARC within
90 days of the expiry of the current ARC can retain the current ARC expiry date plus a year.
However, that is not mandatory and an ARC issued within the 90 days may still be issued as
having an expiry date of a year less a day.
To add to the mire, an Annual Servicing may be extended by 30 days providing the ARC is
still valid. The catch is that any ADs that are due must be carried out as ADs are valid for 12
months and cannot be extended!! The Owner must make an entry into the log book to extend
the Annual Servicing. It up to you to decide when the time comes as to how you deal with the
dates. It is probably best to keep the Annual and ARC expiry dates together. If there are no
ADs to consider then allowing the ARC to be later than the Annual expiry date can
sometimes be useful but if the glider has to be grounded to carry out ADs then the Annual
may as well be carried out.
Of course, to fly legally the glider must have a valid Annual Servicing and a valid ARC.
It should be noted that the Annual Servicing/Check and the Annual Airworthiness Review are
two completely different things and should be signed for as distinct items in the glider’s Log
Book.
It is necessary to record and sign for the ADs that are complied with during the Annual
Servicing or indeed at any other time. Using a Work Sheet or initialling the page at the back
of the Log Book is not adequate. All ADs have to be listed in the main page of the Log Book.
Use a simple statement: The following ADs have been complied with: AD…..etc. Just the AD
Number is required not a full description.
The Log Book must be made up to date by the owner to show all flights and hours flown to
the date the glider is taken in for servicing. Flights are to be recorded in the Log Book on a
daily basis or by a maximum of one month. If recording flights by more than the daily figures
there must be a record of daily flights maintained elsewhere. This means that a Club glider
for instance can have flights logged by the month as the Club’s flying records will be
recorded on a daily flying log either electronic or hand written sheets. Generally private
gliders will record daily flights. Two or more flights may be recorded for any given day.
Maintain a Flying Hours Log on your computer, takes more effort but if you end up filling in
Club glider log books it is a real help – and of course the computer adds up the launches and
hours avoiding errors and enabling checking of the maths. Numerous errors occur when
adding hours and minutes!
The Servicing Schedule whether it be the F267, SDMP F267 or the CAP411 needs to be
tailored to each individual glider or motor glider. The SDMP is the prerogative of the Owner,
it is his/her document. However, experience dictates that very few owners have the
knowledge to sort it out. Some owners have said that as it is their servicing schedule they
wish to remove 90% of it! As the Inspector you cannot say ‘no you cannot do that’, it is the
owner’s right! However, if you are not satisfied with the requirements then you should refuse
to work on the glider until the schedule is satisfactory. Most if not all the SDMP is the MIP,
the Minimum Inspection Program. It cannot be deleted willy-nilly, only line entries that are

--- PAGE 11 ---
6
obviously ‘Not Applicable’ may be deleted. For example, references to Water Ballast on a
glider without the facility can go, likewise flaps on an unflapped glider, retracting
undercarriage on a fixed wheel aircraft.
Some things need to be added if the Maintenance Manual lists something that is not on the
SDMP F267 or CAP411. Sometimes the best thing to do is to do the job yourself! Don’t
forget to get the Owner to sign the SDMP Master Formal Copy. Ideally keep an electronic
copy of the SDMP or CAP411 for every glider or motor glider you maintain. Update the
document as necessary but there should be a hard copy, signed by the Owner, with the aircraft
maintenance file. Generate a Working Copy of the Schedule on your computer making it easy
to raise a copy for the Work Pack. Retain previous revisions as archived copies.
Section 3
Reviewing Documentation for Compliance with
ADs, TNs and BGA Inspections
In order for a review of compliance with ADs, Tech Notes and BGA Inspections there must
be proper and adequate records available.
Having just dealt with the Documentation required for Annual Servicings you can see that
there are several places where compliance is logged. The log book entry noting compliance is
the first place to look but this is not foolproof. Some ADs, TNs etc are required to be carried
out at periods governed by Calendar Months, Years or by Launches, Flying Hours or Engine
Hours. So at the last Annual Servicing some items may not have been subject to compliance.
The pages at the back of the BGA Log Book or the CAAAirframe or Engine Log Books
should have been updated and show compliance and when next due. One can then refer back
to dates and entries in the main part of the Log Book.
This is where a complete Form 280 is really useful especially if you are looking after a glider
or motor glider year after year. Inspection’s due dates and when last complied with are
obvious.
As a suggestion, it is useful to have a shorter list of all the repetitive inspections and the lifed
items; maybe you can raise a document called ‘Record of Recurring Inspections and Lifed
Items’. This document can list inspections from the Form 280 and adds all the lifed items on
the glider. If this is an Excel spread sheet it can be updated every annual and previous sheets
retained on an adjacent ‘page’. The first page would be a ‘live copy’ linked to the glider’s
flying log – another Excel spread sheet. That way the sheet once opened shows the glider’s
flying hours, launches and date and what needs sorting out for the forthcoming annual can be
seen at a glance. You can put a copy of that and the Form 280 in the work pack but I doubt if
many owners read them! (Requires a little more effort on your part).
Now with self-launching sailplanes and TMGs there is another required document – the CAA
CAP543. This is a record of all out of phase inspections such as ADs, TNs, BGA Inspections
(if any) and Lifed Items and is entitled: Time Limited Task, Additional Inspections and
Component Change Record. (In lieu of the Form 280). It is a bit of a pain to maintain
especially if it is just the hard copy. A computerised version generated as another Excel
spread sheet to do the job can be requested Anglia Sailplanes, maybe downloads might be
available later from their web site. It helps a bit! Again this is really a log of events and is not
somewhere to certify compliance.

--- PAGE 12 ---
7
In addition to looking back at previous entries you need to double check that all the latest
ADs and TNs have been received and complied with. Refer back to the list of places to visit
under Annual Servicing Documentation.
A good number of these websites now offer a notification service via email. Visit the website
and register for whatever information you want to be notified of. The BGA Office is very
good at picking up new ADs and TNs and then disseminating the information to Owners and
Inspectors.
Yet another time consuming task that can be recommended is keeping lists of all the ADs and
TNs applicable to gliders you may – or may not – work on. Lists for over 100 types and can
be obtained from Anglia Sailplanes on request. The lists are not necessarily complete or up to
date and should be checked against their source for complete listing. It may be a good starting
point! However, if the BGA, Manufacturer or EASA websites send you a copy or a link I
would grab and store it whether you need it or not.
Section 4
Participation in 5 Annual Servicings
It is a requirement for prospective Inspectors to have participated in 5 Annual Inspections. It
does not matter whether the glider is Part 21 or Non-Part 21.
Participation in 5 Annual Servicings might be a difficult task but you will have to make the
effort to get involved. Not always easy to persuade an Inspector to take you under his or her
wing – you might have to pester someone. Hopefully we can pair you with a Club Inspector
and ask that person to make a special effort with you and help you get as much experience as
possible in the shortest possible time scale. It would good to think that for your 5th Annual
that your friendly Inspector would let you do all the work – and paperwork – with the lightest
of supervision.
If, as your ‘Lecturer’ running this course, I can organise one or more Annuals for the Class to
be involved with, I will.
Section 5
Recognition of Damage in Aircraft Structures.
Damage to glider and aircraft structures comes in many forms, some is blatantly obvious
whilst some is really hidden and very difficult to discover.
We have Primary Damage and Secondary Damage to consider when looking at a glider after
an incident whether that be a full-blown crash, ground loop, heavy landing or even contact
with a hangar door.
Primary damage is usually pretty obvious – it is where something has made contact with the
glider be that the ground or an object – car, flagpole, cable parachute, trailer or the launch
point cabin etc. You name it and someone has probably done it!
Secondary Damage needs careful thought. This damage is the result of a shock being
imposed on part of the glider’s structure and then being transferred to other parts of the

--- PAGE 13 ---
8
structure. Typically this can be striking a wing on something causing say a big dent in the
leading edge. That wing has been monetarily stopped in its tracks whilst the other wing and
fuselage have carried on. Now the other wing has had the shock transferred to it via the
fuselage and may have flicked fore and aft putting additional stress on the fuselage fittings,
the wing spar and drag strut (the structure that forms a triangle linking the main spar to the
rear wing support fitting). The drag struts in both wings can fail within the wing but not
necessarily show on the outside skin. That type of accident happened to an IS28 glider. The
impacted wing suffered a dent in the outer leading edge and a broken drag spar (hidden from
view). The obvious tell-tale was that the flap was now contacting the fuselage when lowered.
Less obvious was the wing/fuselage joint that was no longer parallel. The other wing had
some very minor distortion in its drag strut. The primary cause of the accident was a rusty
brake cable that failed when applied just when it was really needed! (Poor Annual
Inspection).
Wood and fabric gliders show external damage very well, scuff marks on paint, fractured
plywood or worse - broken timbers. Internal damage is more difficult to spot as fractured
timbers can be held in place by plywood skin and/or other parts of the structure. ‘Minor’
damage to internal structure can be caused by general fatigue of a timber joint, for example,
the K13 wing. Take the inboard end of the aileron bay, there is a double rib, ply skin over the
two ribs and there is the point where the secondary spar supporting the aileron hinge joins it.
That junction of the two parts is relatively weak due to the complexity of the joint and it
cracks. The failure is not usually noticed until the ply skin cracks and shows through the
fabric and paint. Applying pressure up and down on the double rib trailing edge occasionally
shows movement before the ply cracks. The same applies to the airbrake boxes, the corners
crack and that is not just the ply skin. This type of damage has nothing to do with a physical
impact type accident. These days we also know that glue failure is a reality particularly in the
older Schleicher gliders.
Unsupported fabric tells a tale on underlying structure. Generally unsupported fabric is taut
and shows no wrinkles or distortion in the way it lies. Allow the underlying structure to be
disturbed and move then a wrinkle will appear. The fabric may be taut but it is not elastic and
will not shrink a wrinkle out of existence. This is true whether you are looking at a wing or
fuselage. If fabric looks good and appears to move when a wing is rotated from flat to leading
edge down then something inside the wing is broken.
Steel tube fuselages all fabric covered will show a wrinkle if a tube is even slightly bowed
rather than badly bent. Do not underestimate the load taut fabric puts on its supporting
structure – the total load is quite high. Given the right knock in the wrong place steel tubes
will be bowed by the fabric. A Falke pushed back into the hangar, tail wheel tyre pressure
may have been a little low but going backwards over the door rails it bounced a little and the
open triangular structure ahead of the tail wheel just caught the door rail (it was surmised),
no-one was aware of the knock and the aircraft was put to bed. Putting the cover over the rear
fuselage the left and right lower longerons were seen to have been pulled upwards and
inboard an alarming distance. Fabric Tension!
Steel tube structures will show external physical damage reasonably well – it bends and
distorts. Wings are not generally made of steel tube but a good number of ailerons are. Steel
Tubes have another mode of failure – rust. This is quite difficult to see under normal
circumstances as they are painted and often covered in fabric where the fabric skin is bonded
on. Sometimes rust spots appear in the fabric inside the aircraft where the fabric is only

--- PAGE 14 ---
9
covered in clear dope and/or adhesive. On fuselages the usual rust trap is in the lower tail end
structure, sometimes surface rust but also internal corrosion. Another place is around the
main undercarriage, a significant amount of tube can be replaced around an undercarriage
bay. Internal corrosion if bad will make holes in the steel tube. Falke aileron ‘spars’ rust;
badly rusted items can be found by feeling the tube under the fabric and squeezing it with the
fingers. Thinned parts of the tube will be felt to move. Other than that pin holes may be found
when the fabric is removed. A light bead blasting to clean off the paint can reveal rusty pin
holes you did not know existed.
Metal structures as in Blaniks, Pilatus B4 or the IS Series of gliders will generally show
external impact damage really well – big dents or holes, bent wings or fuselage. What cannot
be easily seen is secondary damage, corrosion or cracks in internal structure. Fatigue of metal
structures is also an issue, that is why the Blaniks have all but disappeared. The inboard spar
wing fittings gave up the ghost. The Venture has a fatigue life imposed due to the tubes
between the wings in the fuselage. These have been identified as the weakest point due to
damage caused whilst moving on the ground.
Like most materials metal will crack, sometimes somewhere visible and sometimes in hidden
structure. An IS30 (Tandem 2 seat glider) was used a lot for aerobatics and so that was taken
into account when servicing the aircraft. It was with some luck that one day during an
internal inspection of the rear fuselage below the fin feeling carefully in front of a frame two
cracks were found, one either side where the cross section of the fuselage changed from
round to part of the same metal sheet being bent upwards to secure the fin. The change of
section was enabled by a key-hole slot having been cut to allow the upward bend to be made
and the cracks were at the bottom of the key-hole. Removal of the rivetted fairing revealed 3
and 5mm cracks, one either side running round the fuselage.
Fibre Reinforced Plastic (FRP) is now the most common type of glider construction material.
There is glass, carbon and Kevlar used as the fabric reinforcement. It has enabled the
astonishing designs of gliders that we have today. Back in the ‘60s we were scoffing at this
new material – it would never catch on!
Probably most FRP gliders are using glass cloth, (GRP), some carbon, lighter and stiffer, and
Kevlar that is more often used as a mixed weave with carbon fibres. Each has its merits.
Identifying damage can be an issue. External damage caused by impact with an object or the
ground tends to leave some obvious marks. Less obvious is secondary damage as described
earlier where a shock of impact in one place causes damage to occur elsewhere. Sometimes
the shock imposed may be from external impact or occasionally from over-stressing the
airframe through exceeding VNE, flying in very turbulent air or pulling too much ‘G’. Fibre
reinforced plastics are formed in a mould and then literally glued together as in an Airfix
model plane. The ‘glue’ is thickened resin, resin mixed usually with Cotton Flock (ground up
cotton). Resin is relatively brittle but the cotton gives it some strength. Given the right
circumstances the joint between two pieces of structure can fracture. That fracture almost by
definition is not visible. No load path, impose a higher load than normal flight might impose
and big structural failure!
If GRP structure is stressed then the damaged area will turn white showing that the glass
cloth has separated from the resin. The same with cracks, they will be marked by a white line.
Carbon structures tend to fracture rather than just give and so failure is apparent but a crack

--- PAGE 15 ---
10
may not be immediately visible. To find a crack in carbon you can wet the surface with
Acetone and allow it to evaporate whilst watching it. If there is a crack the Acetone will have
penetrated the failure and would remain wet for a little longer than the flat surface. Kevlar if
fractured can go fluffy. It is a more fibrous material than glass or carbon.
Cracks! Cracks can occur in any material if subjected to the right conditions. Cracks love
sharp corners, changes of section and around holes or in places subjected to large changes in
temperature such as exhaust systems. So, when inspecting airframe or engine structures look
for cracks, just think that there is a crack waiting for somewhere to go and then look around
the sort of places just mentioned. Corners of airbrake boxes are favourite, exhaust mufflers,
threaded components such as Astir ‘Ball’ bolts and spigots holding the tailplane on.
Occasionally you may come across a crack whilst checking for something else. The Astir
Tailplane retaining spigots for example. During an Annual Inspection one spigot was found
slack and removed for cleaning. A thread was seen looking as if it was cracked. That was
checked by an Ardrox Dye Penetrant Check and a Magnetic Ink Check and found to be not
cracked despite its appearance. Persevering, the two spigots (second one also removed for
inspection) were taken to an NDT Company with the ability to carry out a Magnaflux Check.
That found that the thread was not cracked but showed there were cracks in the rear face of
the shoulder. Not just in the one with the suspect thread but both. A week later the exercise
with the Magnaflux Check was repeated on another Astir and that found two more spigots
cracked! Hence they along with the Ball Bolt are now subject to a 1000 landings or 10 years
life.
Cracks are there because something has failed. What you see is the result of a failure and it
may be that a particular visible crack is the result of a failure elsewhere. Of course it may be
the primary failure but stop and think about how and why the crack is where it is. Is there an
underlying issue? With the K13 wing double rib cracks and those around the airbrake boxes
there almost certainly is a primary failure elsewhere – literally in the underlying structure.
Just replacing the plywood is not going to solve the issue, the repaired ply patch will crack
again very quickly.
GRP/FRP Structures are, as previously described, literally glued together. These glue joints
are more often than not created when two components are bonded together in a mould and are
not made quite as well as they might have been. Maybe insufficient thickened resin was
applied to the intended joint, the surfaces may not have been prepared properly or the
required peel ply was not applied to a component at an earlier stage of production leaving a
shiny surface for gluing. These things happen. Best to think that there may be a built in
failure and check rather than believe aircraft production is perfect. (Look at Boeing’s recent
issues)!
Section 6
Inspections following an incident and/or damage.
Old AMP Lft 4-3
These inspections are called for to establish the continuing serviceability of the glider. There
are some references to what to look for and where but not all is obvious. It is not the intention
to duplicate the AMP leaflet in full here. The AMP Leaflet is quite comprehensive covering

--- PAGE 16 ---
11
various incidents. This brief may expand upon some of those with actual examples and
experiences.
Lightning Strikes: this is a relatively rare occurrence even in powered aircraft. I have seen
two in my lifetime, one was an Andover, the lightning struck the nose, burned some rivet
heads on the fuselage and made an exit through the fin leaving a hole. The other was a 2-seat
glider and I cannot remember the type off-hand but the strike went in one wing and out of
the other vaporising the aileron control cables and literally blowing the wings apart! Not
much left of that to inspect. Both pilots bailed out and were uninjured.
Ground Loops: A glider drops a wing and is turned round at a high rate of knots. This puts
strain on the wings, particularly the one touching the ground, the rear fuselage and in
particular the fin and or tailplane and of course the undercarriage.
The real weak spot is the rear fuselage to fin area particularly if it has a ‘T’ tail. Inspection of
the area must include looking inside the back end. Not always easy as the Stern Post (the last
vertical part of the structure) is often solid with holes for the rudder cables. Here you will
need an endoscope. Assuming no external physical damage is visible then the best starting
point is to have the front fuselage held either in its dolly or by a wing on the ground, put your
ear to the fuselage and listen for creaks and groans from the structure whilst a friend tries to
rock the fin back and forth. If a rib or frame has disbonded from the skin you should hear it
grinding as it moves across the fractured joint. Noises are not a good sign and deeper
investigation is necessary. Frames in the fuselage can also be affected.
The down going wing may suffer some physical damage at the tip but something referred to
as ‘Secondary Damage’ may exist inboard. If a wing is shock loaded at one tip that shock is
felt along the complete wing structure and into the other wing and possibly the fuselage. That
means all parts need to be inspected.
If the nose has struck the ground then there may be damage to the underside. Here the centre
line fuselage joint may have cracked open as well as some other compression damage.
The undercarriage and its mountings have been stressed as at some point in swinging round
the undercarriage probably travelled sideways. A careful inspection of the wheel, the
undercarriage structure and in particular the mountings is required and should include a
retraction test.
All inspections are required but some judgement can be applied depending on the severity of
the ground loop.
Wheels Up Landing: These can happen on grass or hard runways having nil effect on the
fuselage to holes through ground away structure of whatever material.
On a grass landing there is often no structural damage, just green skid marks. However, if the
fuselage has gone across a hard tuft of grass then that can be sufficient to cause the centre
joint to disbond or cause the skin to compress and crack. The joint coming apart would be
seen as a crack in the gel coat and inside the fuselage under the seat, maybe a visible crack
along the joint and possibly some glass fibres torn up from the side of the joint. An area of
whitened glass would indicate delamination of the structure.

--- PAGE 17 ---
12
Hard runway landings will of course attract a considerable amount of damage! With luck the
damage may be heavy scuffing of the skin but if the touchdown was heavy then severe
cracking around the cockpit area is likely to occur and require a significant amount of skin to
be replaced – the new skin having to be made in a mould. A prolonged landing run on the
hard runway will no doubt make a hole through the skin.
Either type of landing requires the seat to come out and the internal skin condition assessed.
Check the bonding of secondary skins and frames and also the rudder pedal mounting. Some
rudder pedals of the adjustable type are reliant on a block of wood being bonded to the skin.
Heavy Landings and/or PIOs: If a glider has a heavy landing then inappropriate ‘G’ loadings
will have been applied to the entire airframe. PIOs – where the glider landing oscillates
between the tail wheel/skid and the nose wheel or skid (or maybe just the underside of the
fuselage) – can cause significant damage.
The entire undercarriage and/or its mountings may be ripped out of the fuselage or severely
damaged. Nose wheels can impart shock loads to the fuselage as they are not sprung in any
way, a really hard bang can split the tyre and tube and then there is not even any give in the
wheel assembly.
The Club’s ASK21 suffered such an incident a couple of years back, the tyre and tube burst
and a crack with some delamination appeared outboard and slightly forward of the nose
wheel. Fortunately no other damage. The ‘flat’ tyre was reported as a puncture, no mention of
the PIOs! The ASK21 in particular needs a full inspection of the front ‘saddle’ which is the
internal moulding holding the nosewheel, aerotow release unit and the control column. This
moulding often delaminates from the skin when shock loaded and calls for quite a big repair
job.
The Grob 103 the Club used to own had a heavy landing – really heavy – and that caused the
entire undercarriage mounting to be forced into the fuselage. That was a big repair job.
If a tyre/tube has burst or been split by the rim of the wheel then there is cause for the
structure to be thoroughly inspected.
Overweight Flights: This should not happen! There are cockpit placards with weight limits.
However, a point here is that the vulnerable part of the structure is the wing spar at the root
end. It is a bending load caused by the weight of the fuselage – the weight of the non-lifting
parts – being supported by the wings. At the wing tip the bending load is practically nil. As
you go inboard the bending load increases as can be seen from the wing shape of a glider
being winch launched. The wing fittings and spar stubs can only take so much load. That is
why when weighing a glider there is a factor of ‘The maximum weight of the non-lifting
components’. Don’t forget that the tailplane is pushing down and not helping to lift the glider.
Lost Tools or Components – Loose Article Checks: Any item that is not secured to the
airframe is a loose article and even a small coin in the wrong place can jam a control rod or
system.
A loose article check should always be carried out prior to refitting panels and seats whether
or not you are aware of a lost tool or component. If you think you have dropped a nut or rivet
into an aircraft you MUST find it or ensure that it is not in the aircraft. A thorough inspection

--- PAGE 18 ---
13
of an area may take an hour but that is far better than something jamming controls on the next
flight! Use an endoscope to look in difficult places, if the item is steel then a powerful magnet
moved on the exterior of the skin can often locate the item. Retrieve items with magnets, grip
sticks or even a stick with self-adhesive tape (Tesa Tape perhaps) on the end sticky side out.
Pilots do not seem to be aware of the dangers of loose articles dropped in cockpits and under
the seats. You will no doubt recover pens, pencils occasionally keys and the odd £1 coin.
Finders-keepers! Sometimes it is worth putting the offending article up on a Club notice
board just to highlight the issue.
Propeller Strikes: This covers a multitude of sins from really wrecking a propeller to banging
it on the hangar door when manoeuvring the aircraft in or out. The leaflet is somewhat out of
date and appears to leave the decision to carry out a full Shock Load Check to the inspector.
Engine manufacturers have issue strict guidelines as to when a Shock Load Check is to be
carried out. Lycoming now state that a Shock Load Check should be carried out if the
propeller is used to cut long grass. Striking the propeller on a hangar door with the engine
running is bad enough but hitting the door with a static propeller imparts a bending load on
the crankshaft rather than a rotating load – even worse.
So generally if the propeller has made contact with the ground, a bird or a hangar door a
Shock Load Check should be carried out (whether the owner likes it or not). Shock Load
Checks can be carried out by the manufacturers, Rotax approved engineers or by someone
with the BGA EO approval. The inspection is relatively expensive but the engine will be
returned to service with new bearings and a clean bill of health. It will have the same number
of engine hours run as it did before the incident. Limbach ensure the engine and accessories
are top notch before it is released back to service so it is preferable to send an engine back
rather than have it done without all the accessories being fully checked over. Note that Slick
Magnetos are scrapped following a shock load incident and a new one has to be fitted. High
hour Limbach engines will not get a Shock Load Check carried out at the factory, an
exchange engine will be required. Not always to an Owner’s choice as they have to find quite
a sum of money. However, the pill is sweetened by pointing out that the Insurance will pay
for a new propeller, a Shock Load Check and the time taken to remove/fit engines and pay
the associated transport costs. They end up with a new engine and propeller for a fraction of
the cost! That of course always assumes the aircraft is sufficiently insured. One of the first
questions to ask when dealing with an accident is ‘How much is the aircraft insured for’? It is
surprising how many gliders do not carry sufficient insurance, particularly motor gliders.
Insuring an aircraft or glider for the purchase price is just not enough!
Section 7
Rigging and Derigging
Glider Flight and Maintenance Manuals
Enough said or you should not be here!
However, some food for thought:
Rigging and derigging of gliders needs a number of bodies although of course there are those
who have one-man rigging aids. However, it is best to carry out the operation with as few a
number of folks as necessary. Establish who is in charge of the operation, explain the

--- PAGE 19 ---
14
meaning of the words forward, backwards, left and right, up and down. Too many cooks and
there are always too many Chiefs! Everyone trying to get a word in edgeways and no-one
knows what is supposed to be happening. If there is a problem don’t continue fiddling whilst
folks on the wing tips are getting tired (and probably irritated); remove the wing or wings and
have a short rest and then start again. Don’t allow others to come along with distractions –
they may think their problem is important but it is not as important as the rigging going to
plan and all the main pins being inserted. Two such examples come to mind. One was a guy
enjoying his soaring flight but felt the seat was uncomfortable, rummaging under the seat
cushion he found the reason – the one and only wing main pin! That must have concentrated
the mind. The other was a glider having flown an aerobatic sortie and the wing fell off at the
end of the landing run, well that was lucky!
When derigging older gliders, K13s and Olympias for instance, with tapered main wing pins
is that the pins are pulled out rather than being hit from behind with a hammer. That avoids
distorting the threads for the retaining nut and also ensures that the wing roots and stub spars
are not subjected to needless shock loads. It does not take too much effort to make up an
extractor kit.
Section 8
Cleaning and Lubrication
Glider Maintenance Manual: Lubrication Chart
Cleaning the glider is really the responsibility of the owner, not yours. Most Clubs and a lot
of owners now get around to washing the gliders down after flying so general dirt and bugs
are removed. Wheel bays often get left to fill with mud and/or grass depending on the time of
year.
Mud is a pain to remove whether it is wet or dry but as you will take the wheel out during an
annual (won’t you!) then all the crap can be cleaned out.
Grass on the other hand can be a real hazard. It accumulates in the wheel bay and can get
packed in quite tightly if the glider is operating from grass runways all the time. It dries out
and becomes a fire hazard! Friction from the wheel rotating at high speed or overheated brake
system, particularly disc brakes, can start it burning.
Cleaning adhesive residue from glider is a thankless task. There is a residue from Tesa Tape
used on control surfaces as gap seals, wing tape between wing/winglets and fuselage etc and
around some access panels. Remove Tesa Tape using a hot air gun to just warm it as you pull
it off. By doing that there is generally little residue left. Removing the tape cold can leave
significant amounts of residue as will getting it too hot! Also when cold there is a small risk
of pulling the gel coat off. (Also warm a roll of Tesa Tape before putting a new piece back on
the glider, not hot, just warm. Comes off the roll so much more easily).
Thin capping tape used over Mylar to wing joints is there for a long time and when it does
come off it is usually because the adhesive has let go of the tape leaving the residue on the
surface. The double sided tape used to secure Mylar tapes is particularly difficult to remove.
The adhesive has a thin plastic film between the two sticky sides!
Wing tape is on and off some gliders every time it flies. However, gliders that are left rigged
taped up accumulate residue when the tape is removed.

--- PAGE 20 ---
15
Removing the residue is time consuming but necessary. The best solvent for the job is
probably U-Pol Degreaser. It removes tape residue relatively easily, takes some elbow grease,
but is not such a strong solvent that it removes paint or gel coat. It will not even remove
cellulose paint very easily, might if you persist in rubbing it vigorously. If the U-Pol does not
shift the residue then something stronger by way of Acetone or paint thinners may have to be
used but please bear in mind that strong solvents can cause paint to be removed and gel coats
to be damaged though prolonged exposure. They also damage Perspex canopies very rapidly.
Polishing the glider can be done by hard-waxing gel coats but NOT painted surfaces!! Final
polishing is good on most gliders, some manufacturers advise against it – Pik gliders do not
like polished wings in rain – they fall out of the sky with droplets of water on the wings.
Whatever polish you use on FRP gliders do not use anything containing silicon. It might
produce a great shine but it is very difficult to remove if a repair is necessary. Silicon can be
sanded but remain on a surface, you prepare the repair area and silicon can creep onto the
surfaces to be bonded and wreck the joint!
Lubrication is something that baffles some people. Things go from one extreme to another,
Some just do not see the necessity and others swamp bearings with lubricant – one of my
customers thought covering each bearing in a really thick layer of grease was the correct
thing to do.
As with everything in life there is a happy medium (sometimes found at Fairs). Most
Maintenance Manuals have a lubrication scheme saying oil or grease on which bearings.
There is no point in using excessive amounts of oil or grease, oil will drip everywhere and
attract dirt and certainly in the case of wooden structures start destroying it. Too much grease
will also attract dirt but usually on the bearing it is trying to lubricate thus wrecking the
bearing one way or another.
Oil has to be dispensed from an oil can, a syringe and hypodermic needle (sharp end ground
off) makes a good oil can. Medical syringes are not bad but the rubber seal is degraded
quickly and the plunger sticks. ‘Industrial’ syringes are obtainable from Farm Equipment
shops, they have an O-Ring seal that can be changed occasionally. With a blunted
hypodermic needle it is easy to dispense 2-3 drops of oil into a bearing. That is all it needs,
never had a bearing seize through lack of lubrication. Some open ball bearings are protected
by felt washers, these should be just damp with oil. Piano Hinges do need a fair bit of oil so
that it soaks in. Spoiler hinges for example should have a spray oil run along them and then
the surface wiped dry after a couple of minutes. Don’t forget the humble undercarriage door
hinges!
Grease on the other hand needs to be forced into the bearing, this can be difficult if not
impossible without taking the joint apart. Most items that require grease are either bolted
joints with a grease nipple in the bolt, bushed joints as found in most undercarriages or wheel
bearings as found in Cleveland Wheels fitted to the K21 and vintage gliders fitted with
Spitfire or Hurricane tail wheels. The only way of applying the grease is either through a
grease nipple or by dismantling the joint or bearing. The K21 wheel bearings are taper roller
bearings and need stripping down, cleaning and regreasing every annual inspection. The felt
seal should be cleaned and dried before reassembly.

--- PAGE 21 ---
16
Section 9
Life Extension Inspections
Manufacturers Life Extension Inspection Schedule
These inspections are mandated by the manufacturer and in most cases start at 3000 hours,
some at 6000 hours. Thereafter the periodic inspections come at maybe 3000 hours or less as
the total flying hours increase.
Manufacturers issue the schedule often against an particular airframe and on the payment of a
fee – so you effectively buy the Inspection Schedule.
The inspections are very thorough and should not be skimped over. There are inspections to
the basic structure to ensure no hidden damage, removal of the control surfaces to check that
the weight and mass balance is within the specified limits. The limits will be found in the
Maintenance Manual. Often there are metal components to replace at the higher flying hour
inspections, for example the K21 12000 hour inspection requires the main pins and the front
wing support spigots in the fuselage to be changed and the brass bushes in the spar stubs if
not recently replaced. Replacing the bushes is a bit of a sod, the rest not difficult, move the
handles of the main pins from old to new and the front spigots are only a push fit into the
fuselage tube. However, there is no point in replacing the spigots with standard size ones if
they are sloppy in worn bushes in the wings. Schleicher and other manufacturers will make
pins to the size you require, then you can ream out the bushes to fit.
Hindsight has shown that if a glider, say an ASK21, has been to a very reputable glider
refinishing company such as The Glider Service in Slovenia (who have an excellent
reputation worldwide) in the recent past prior to the life inspection it would seem that
Schleicher accept that (without saying as much) as completing the full inspection because
they know The Glider Service will not let anything out of their workshop that is not 100% in
all respects.
The 12000 Hour inspection for the ASK21 is in two parts, the first being basically paperwork
establishing the history of the airframe. If satisfied Schleicher will allow the second part – the
physical inspection – to take place. If they are not satisfied then the aircraft is considered out
of life and will have to be scrapped. So aircraft records are very important, without the
historical data it would not be possible to give Schleicher a full list of defects rectified from
tyre changes upwards thus allowing the glider to pass the paperwork element of the
inspection.
Section 10
Pilot-Owner Maintenance
AMP 2-1
The AMP reference elucidates upon the Air Navigation Order and EU regulation 1056/2008
that allows pilot-owners to perform certain tasks on their glider or motor glider without the
need for an inspector to be present or sign for the work carried out. The definition of a pilot-
owner is given in the opening paragraphs and the scope of work that can be carried out is
listed further down the document. Note that Clubs are required to maintain a list of pilots who
can perform pilot-owner maintenance on its gliders.

--- PAGE 22 ---
17
It is not intended to reproduce the AMP leaflet here but to refer to it. There is scope for
numerous tasks to be carried out by pilot-owners and is good experience for folks like
yourselves to get involved with the more technical side of gliding.
Look through the list of tasks that can be carried out and you will see that most unscheduled
tasks like tyre changes, secondary instrument changes and brake shoe/lining replacement and
so on appear in the ‘can-be-done’ list! All tasks though have to be documented and signed for.
Examples of work sheets are at the end of the AMP Leaflet.
Don’t forget to add this work to your Personal Experience Record Sheet.
It would be worth getting on one of Gordon MacDonald’s lectures on the subject. These are
Zoom Meetings usually run in the Autumn. Keep an eye on the BGA Website where the
courses will be advertised.

--- PAGE 23 ---
18
Chapter 2,
Levelling and Weighing of Gliders
AMP 1-9, A, B & C; AC 43.13-1B Chapter 10
BGA Standard Repairs to Gliders Section 6
Section 1
Explanations and Tooling
Gliders, and in fact all aircraft, have to be weighed to calculate the empty weight, Centre of
Gravity (CG) position and maximum and minimum cockpit loading. This ensures that the
Forward and Aft CG Limits for safe flight are not exceeded.
The in-flight CG Limits are established by the manufacturer. The limits, in very simplistic
terms, dictate the CG position where full pitch control of the glider can be achieved. Fly
outside these limits and you run the risk of not being able to raise or lower the nose as
required. Taking it to extremes the glider could stall and keep stalling till the ground
intervened or crash into the ground on landing because the nose could not be raised to round
out.
So every now and then we weigh gliders, the BGA has decided that is to be every ten years or
when the glider has undergone significant repairs or perhaps a complete instrument panel
refurbishment putting in 57mm instruments and a glass screen in lieu of 80mm instruments.
Some modifications or repairs are stated as having ‘negligible effect’ on the weight and CG
but carry out enough of these works over ten years and it is worth checking. Change a heavy
instrument or battery for a light weight one then the weight and CG change can be calculated
and recorded – don’t forget to change the Limitations Placard if things have changed.
The tools required for weighing are simple:

Maintenance Manual with the Weighing Data and BGA Data Sheet

Weighing Scales - calibrated

A tape measure

A spirit level

Support for the tail wheel or skid

A means of getting the glider ‘level’ or in its rigging position (a Trammel Bar)

A floor brush

Masking tape to stick to the floor and mark with the pen

A long straight edge

A calculator or a weighing programme on a computer
To get the glider ready for weighing it needs to be put into its Rigging Position or Level. This
requires the tail to be lifted so that the fuselage is in a particular position horizontally. This
position is generally quoted in the manuals as so many mm in 1000mm tail down on the
upper part of the rear fuselage. Sometimes it is the cockpit sill level or the underside of a
particular wing rib level. To achieve this you need an adjustable support for the tail wheel or
skid. The top of the support must be big enough to support the weighing scale. A stool
and then thick blocks of wood followed by some thinner ones for fine adjustment is adequate.
Some folks have made fully adjustable platform ‘jacks’. A safety note should be added here,
the higher you lift the tail the further forward the CG moves in relation to the main wheel,

--- PAGE 24 ---
19
this is not much of an issue with a glider but with a motor glider such as an SF25C with two
front wheels or a Grob 109 the weight on the rear fuselage disappears quite rapidly and it
becomes nose heavy – oops! So be careful and even if you are lifting the tail end to work on
the tail wheel assembly of a motor glider tie a heavy weight to the rear fuselage (just in case)!
Section 2
Preparation
Firstly we have to weigh the wings. This weight taken from the total empty weight gives the
weight of Non-Lifting Parts. This figure is then used to calculate the load the glider can carry
subject to not exceeding the maximum weight of the Non-Lifting Parts. The wings can of
course be weighed when derigging the glider after the weighing but often the owner would
like to keep it rigged for flying or leaving rigged outside. The wings are best weighed with
the scales on the floor, put a protective pad on each scale to protect the wing from damage.
Next rig the glider. Usual rig, nothing special. Check that the glider is equipped with all the
usual things it will carry, cushions, batteries, GPS/Tablets but not a parachute or water
ballast. The glider should now be as it is for you to get in and fly. Shut the canopy and it is
ready for weighing. Do ensure that there are no ballast weights fitted to a glider and that in
the case of a motor glider the engine has a full charge of oil and the fuel tank has been
drained to ‘unusable fuel’ level.
The weighing comprises obtaining two distinct sets of numbers: the weight of the glider on
the main wheel and tail wheel or skid and then distances from datum for the two weighing
points – main wheel and tail wheel or skid. Then you can do the number crunching.
This sketch, courtesy of the AMP, shows the relationship of weights, CG Positions and
measurements.
Section 3
Positioning the Glider
Getting the glider in the rigging position is not difficult given a Trammel Bar to get the
correct angle of dangle. A Standard Cirrus is to be 1000:51 tail down on the top of the rear
fuselage, an LS7 has to be horizontal on the underside of the rear fuselage. Set the Trammel
Bar to give the 1000:51 level by adjusting the long support to be 51mm longer than the short

--- PAGE 25 ---
20
one using a vernier calliper, the supports are 1000mm apart. Lift the tail onto supporting
blocks until the Trammel Bar is level. It is at this point a number of watching owners point
out that the scale still has to be put on top of the support – you in turn can point out that the
main wheel also has to be put onto the scale! Remove the tail support and wheel the glider,
wings level, onto the front scale having ensured that it has been set at zero with the two wheel
chocks on it. Chock the main wheel! Now lift the tail, insert the support and also the scale.
Section 4
Obtaining the Weight
Shut the hangar doors! No significant draughts allowed – the wing is designed to generate lift
and a light breeze will take several Kg off the weight and the scales will be reading
erratically. Sweep the hangar floor where you will be sticking masking tape!
The person holding the wing tip needs to get the glider balanced laterally and that may not be
with the wings level, one wing maybe heavier than the other. Once the point of balance has
been achieved he or she should wait until the scales have shown a steady reading, then let go
and readings taken from the scales. Do that a couple of time to get the readings accurate.
Note them down.
Section 5
Obtaining the Measurements
The measuring is done wings level supported by trestles. Drop a plumb bob at the datum
point, usually the root end of the wing leading edge. (Some datum points are described as X
mm forward of a fixed point on the airframe rather than the leading edge). Mark this point
left and right on the floor where you have stuck a piece of masking tape. Then establish the
position of the main wheel axle – the weight of the glider passes through this point. Again
mark points on both sides of the glider. The use of a laser to drop the perpendicular is easier
than trying to use a plumb bob. Repeat the exercise for the tail weighing point. Tip: if this
point is a skid put a small bar or bolt under it to get a more accurate position of the load path
otherwise use the wheel axle. Again a laser is the best way to drop the perpendicular.
Now you have the weight of wings and the whole glider and marks on the floor ready for
measuring distances.
Remove the scale and support at the tail end and the glider off the front scale and move it out
of the way so the measuring can be done – take care not to disturb the masking tape and
marks.
Using a straight edge join the left and right hand marks and mark another piece of masking
tape halfway between them. You then have three marks: Datum Point, Main Wheel (front
weighing point) and the tail wheel/skid (rear weighing point). Measure datum to front
weighing point and datum to rear weighing point and record the figures. Some weighing
calculations use front weighing point to rear weighing point so ensure you are collecting and
using the correct measurement. The figures are the horizontal figures measured on the floor
and NOT the actual distance from main wheel to tail wheel/skid.

--- PAGE 26 ---
21
Section 6
Number Crunching
That is all the data required and the number crunching can be carried out. Of course all data
should be imperial or metric, don’t mix them.
The empty weight is the sum of the front and rear weights, by moments the CG position can
be calculated and is aft of datum. Then following the fixed figures given in the Maintenance
Manual of fore and aft CG limits and Pilot’s CG position relative to the datum point the
maximum and minimum seat load can be calculated.
For the maximum seat load you have 4 figures to calculate:

Load by Max AUW

Load by forward CG Limit

Load by Max Weight of Non-Lifting Components

Load by max seat Load given by manufacturer
The maximum seat load is the lowest of the above figures.
For minimum seat load there are two calculations:

Load by rear CG Limit

Load by Minimum Seat Load given by the manufacturer in the Maintenance Manual.
The minimum seat load is the maximum of the above figures.
Once you have finished the calculations compare the results with the last weighing. The
results will probably differ but they should not be wildly apart! If they are start asking
questions and maybe remeasure and reweigh.
Section 7
The Maths, See Appendices 1 and 2
Achieving the Empty Weight is just an addition. The Empty Weight is the sum of the weight
on the main wheel and on the tail wheel/skid. Pounds or Kgs at the owners discretion.
Wf plus Wr =We.
The empty Centre of Gravity (Xe) position is calculated by Moments (weight x
distance). Here we know the weights and distance from the datum. We know the
Empty Weight but not the CG Position. So by Moments we can say that the sum of
the Moments of the fore and aft weighing points about the datum equals the Moment
of the Empty CG position. One small gotcha to remember is that here moments AFT
of Datum are positive and moments FORWARD of datum are negative! Thus:
(Wf x Xfs) + (Wr x Xrs) =We x Xe
Therefore :
Xe = ((Wf x Xfs) + (Wr x Xrs))/We mm or inches Aft of Datum (AOD).

--- PAGE 27 ---
22
The Weight of the Non-Lifting Parts is the Empty Weight minus the weight of the
wings (port and starboard):
We – (Wp +Ws) = Wnl
Also remember that in the majority of cases empty and flight CG positions are aft of the main
wheel, a lot of older wooden gliders had skids because the Flight CG was ahead of the wheel
and that is true for a number of current two seat gliders like the K21 and Puchacz hence the
nose wheels.
That gives us the basis for further calculations of maximum and minimum seat loads.
These calculations involve the use of our calculated figures and fixed figures given by the
manufacturer in the Maintenance Manual. At the top of the AMP weighing sheet, Appendices
1 and 2, there are Fixed Parameters followed by the Weighing Data and then the Calculated
Figures. Appendix 3 is the BGA Flight Manual Supplement authorising Extended Weight
Operation and Astir Data Sheet. The last sheet, Appendix 4, – an actual weighing report –
shows the input information and the basic results for a single seat glider.
The calculations required to ascertain the Max/Min cockpit loads for a single seat glider are
relatively straight forward, just need to calculate the maximum load to bring the CG to the
Forward Limit and similarly to the Aft Limit. Then Max load by Max All Up Weight (AUW),
max load by Non-Lifting Parts and Manufacturer’s max seat load. (Usually 110Kg or 242
Lbs). From the manual the minimum seat load is also required.
For a Tandem 2-Seat Glider there are a lot more calculations to carry out, and thank goodness
for the invention of the computer! In years past it was all written out on a sheet of
paper and using either brain power or a calculator the answers were eventually calculated. In
the weighing sheets copied to you the idea is that as the data is typed in the calculations are
carried out so by the time the last bit of data is fed in the answers are there! The calculations
involve setting up a table using the different weights in the rear cockpit to find the max/min
in the front cockpit. We usually start the table with Zero Load in the rear cockpit – that is so
that the glider can be flown solo!! Then we go to 60Kg and work the table up in 10Kg
increments to 110Kg. Seven calculations and then we can produce the required Loading
Chart for the cockpits.
There is now another set of figures to consider – The BGA Extended Weight Operations.
This is a document introduced to formalise the ad hoc increase in the maximum AUW that
we used to be able to apply for in relation to a specific glider and has been agreed by EASA.
The authorisation is in the form of a Flight Manual Supplement (FMS) issued by the BGA for
gliders in the UK prior to Transition in September 2008. The Extended Weight Operations
cannot be used on gliders imported to the UK since that date (ie, did not undergo the
Transition process from BGA status to EASA status). So for example an Astir that was
Transitioned can use the Extended Weight Operations but one imported from the EU or
elsewhere after Transition cannot. If in doubt and being hassled by an owner speak to the
BGA Office for confirmation. They will tell you whether or not a specific glider has had the
FMS issued. The FMS is issued to individual gliders and gives the authority to use the
extended weight data and refers to the BGA Data Sheet for the Glider Type. A copy of the
FMS and Data Sheet for the Astir is attached at Appendix 3. These BGA
Documents have a lot of good information on them as well as the Extended Weight

--- PAGE 28 ---
23
information. The data is generally accurate but if in doubt look in the manuals and Type
Certificate Data Sheet (TCDS). The allowable increases in weight are detailed on the top left
hand table ‘Weighing Data’.
Now you have to go back to number crunching and update the maximum weight figures
given on the Data Sheet and produce another Weighing Report. The new figures obtained
need to be inserted into the Loading Placard with a note saying that whilst operating the
glider in the extended weight range the glider is Non-Aerobatic. Occasionally the application
of the Extended Weights does not alter the maximum cockpit load.
Another thing that needs recording on the Weighing Report is a note of what was in the glider
at the time of weighing, what instruments were fitted, any special cushions, batteries and
what type. This enables the person carrying out the next weighing to check back if the
weighing data is very different to the previous weighing. If there is a big difference that
cannot be explained admit that you are possibly at fault and do the job again.
The weighing scales have to be kept in good order and calibrated every so often, say every 3
– 5 years. Some Clubs have their own scales which is handy for volunteer Inspectors. If you
are looking after a lot of gliders as a professional repairer then it is worth investing in
weighing gear but it can be quite expensive. With your own scales you can weigh light
aircraft as well as gliders and make a short appearance on TV - Warbird Workshop (Piper
Cub). Bathroom scales should not be used as they are not calibrated and their accuracy cannot
be guaranteed and probably do not have sufficient weight range to do the job.
A quick check on the serviceability of the weighing scales just prior to use can be carried out
by standing on each scale in turn – the weight shown should be the same on each one.
Once all the calculations are finished you need to produce:

A Weighing Report

Cockpit Limitations Placard

A record of the Weighing and Result in the back of the BGA Log Book and in some
cases in the Glider’s Flight Manual.
Appendix 4 is a weighing report for the Astir. Copies of Limitations Placards are also there,
one for the Astir and an example for a K21. It is suggested that Placards are printed on good
quality paper, maybe 120gms/m, and printed on a laser printer as Ink Jet inks do tend to fade
too soon. Once printed, laminate to protect and stick in the cockpit with decent double-sided
tape. You can alter the layout of the Limitations Placard to suit the available space in a
particular glider maybe even make up a speed placard and a weight placard.
It should be noted that some gliders, the LS Series for example, rely on a set of tables in the
Maintenance Manual to provide the cockpit loadings that have been outlined above. The
glider still needs to be weighed and the empty weight and empty CG position calculated but
the rest is obtained from the tables using those figures.
If weighing is being carried out concurrent with an Annual Inspection now is a good time to
check Control Deflections!

--- PAGE 29 ---
24

--- PAGE 30 ---
25

--- PAGE 31 ---
26

--- PAGE 32 ---
27

--- PAGE 33 ---
28

--- PAGE 34 ---
29

--- PAGE 35 ---
30

--- PAGE 36 ---
31
Appendix 5 to Glider Weighing
Standard Layout for Limitations Placard:
Altered Layout to Suit Available Space:

--- PAGE 37 ---
32