# Chapter 3

Fuselage, Wings and Tail Surfaces
This section covers Inspection, Cleaning and Waxing of the glider. Although broken down
into Fuselage, Wings and Tail Surfaces in an earlier document we will deal with it under
‘Functions’.
Section 1
Inspection
Inspection of the airframe, and not considering motor gliders and their engines at this point, is
a crucial part of the Servicing being carried out and covers a wide spectrum of things to look
at. These are some of the things that need inspecting and for what:

External Structure:
Looking for structural damage, cracks particularly around airbrake boxes, gel
coat degradation by way of peeling, stress cracking and osmosis (little bubbles
caused by water absorption).
Fin and rear fuselage for external and internal damage.
Fabric degradation.
Wing tip skids and/or wheels for wear and lubrication of wheels.
Main skids (on older gliders) and tail skids for wear.
Ailerons for damage to outer trailing edges. (Some drag on the ground at full
down deflection – check wing tip skid).
Damaged or corroded metal fittings and tubular structures.
Undercarriage, wheels and tyres checking for wear and security of up and
down locking. (Dealt with later in more detail).

Internal Structure:
Looking for structural damage caused by clumsy boots and battery
mishandling or possible white marks in glass structures showing damage not
visible on the external surface.
Disbonding of structural parts of the component – seat supports, seat backs,
wing ribs and trailing edges or fuselage frames etc.
Canopy and locking devices/hinges.
Security of Instrument Panels, battery boxes and mountings for GPS/Tablet
devices.
Control Systems (covered in the next Chapter, Chapter 4).

Wooden Structures:
Wooden Gliders whether all wood or just the wings are subject to special BGA
Inspection every three years, see the latest issue for full details.

Special Inspections:
Airworthiness Directives from the CAA and/or EASA.
Technical Notices from the Manufacturer.
Service Bulletins from the Manufacturer.

--- PAGE 38 ---
33
There are specific special inspections listed in the BGA Inspections List
covering things from gas struts, seat trim and colour coding of control grips
and their security.

Play in Wing and Tailplane Attachments:
Because the wings and tailplane are designed to be fitted and removed for
flight or trailer storage they are usually held by and on ‘pins’ and bushes. Over
time these inevitably wear and need rectification to reduce the play produced
by the worn parts. The Maintenance Manual gives the amount of free play
allowed in the system. The wings are usually given a fore and aft allowance at
the wing tip and tailplanes normally an up/down allowance at the tip. Wear at
the root end of the wing can be found by trying to lift the leading and trailing
edges – gently! Bad wear can be seen by fractured wing tapes! This fracture of
wing tapes indicates significant movement in flight. Fore and aft play in the
wings is often reduced by fitting shim washers over the pins. Tailplane play
generally requires oversize pins and reamed out bushes although sometimes
rotating the locating pin 90º does the trick, (temporary measure). The same
applies to up/down play at the wing root.
In addition the wings should be subjected to a Frequency Check. This involves ‘bouncing’ the
glider so that the wings oscillate up and down. This is achieved by raising and lowering the
wing tip until the wings and the up/down movement being imparted are ‘in sync’. The
oscillations are then at the natural frequency of wing deflection. The frequency is then
measured by counting the number of oscillations per minute, that figure is then recorded for
historical information. I don’t think there is a specific place for it but maybe an additional
entry in the control deflections sheet. Generally if one refers back to the previous frequency
check the result should be much the same. A different frequency may mean hidden spar
damage – go and investigate.
To inspect the rear fuselage, fin and rudder the rudder needs to be removed for access.
Generally removal of the rudder is quite quick and simple. Usually just disconnect the control
cables, remove the retaining bolt at the bottom and lift off. Grob gliders are somewhat
different as the side hinge (in some cases) needs to be undone and the operating rod
disconnected before the rudder can be removed from the airframe. (See glider Maintenance
Manuals for details). Once off the airframe the rudder can be inspected, look for security of
any lead mass balance weights, physical damage, paint cracks leading to fabric damage if
fabric covered or grp cracks on the trailing edge where folks grab hold and squeeze it and
damage beneath the rudder. The hinge bearings need inspecting and they come in various
types:

Ball Race

Plain Spherical Bearings.(DG gliders now have a large diameter washer below the
bearing to prevent rudder loss should the bearing migrate from its housing).

Bush Type. Note that bearings of the bush type have the bush very slightly longer than
the retaining tube structure. Check that this is so. Brass bushes particularly in
Schleicher gliders get shortened in use by over tightening the hinge bolt/nut. This can
produce a burr that makes extraction of the bush difficult. Worse still is that if the
hinge bolt is tightened right up the hinge effectively seizes up making the control
surface stiff if not impossible to operate. The bush should be clamped by the rudder

--- PAGE 39 ---
34
hinge half and be free to rotate within its supporting tube. Following installation there
should be a very small amount of vertical movement in the hinge.
With the rudder removed there is generally access to the rear fuselage past the fin stern post
allowing inspection to take place. Check the bonding and security of the fin stern post and the
rudder hinges. Rudder hinges, top and bottom, can and do crack occasionally so have a good
look.
Note here about removing and refitting the rudder. If the rudder is cable operated and the
cables come directly from the rudder pedals, put a strop around both left and right pedals and
pull them backwards and tie them there – it takes the tension load out of the cables at the
rudder end. This action prevents the cable whipping back into the fuselage and refitting a
slack cable is a lot easier. Use a steel hook to retrieve cable ends when reconnecting the
cables.
Section 2
Cleaning and Waxing:
In theory the glider should be presented to the Inspector in a clean condition. Most gliders are
cleanish but the dirty areas are usually the undercarriage bay/box, fuselage behind wheels and
areas where self-adhesive tape has been applied either as wing tape or control gap sealing
tape.
Mud and grot in the wheel bay can be scraped out, tape adhesive residue needs solvents. That
was covered previously, Upol Degreasant or thinners/Acetone if something stronger is
needed.
Gel coats can be brightened up by Hard Waxing, gel coats not paint. Hard waxing is a process
using a power wheel mop and a block of wax containing fine abrasive particles. With the mop
spinning the hard wax is applied to it and then onto the structure. This process removes a fine
layer of gel coat that has been oxidised and faded to ‘off-white’. The process does not
necessarily produce a good shine although different grades of hard wax (with abrasive
content) are available and can polish to a reasonable finish. It is hard work and unless the gel
coat surface is in need of abrasive treatment it is best left well alone. Do not let the mop
work in one place as the friction will cause heat damage to the structure.
There are several grades of liquid polishes by Farecla applied on a foam pad and polished off
using a sheepskin pad. These are usually more than adequate to shine up faded gel coats and
can be used carefully on painted surfaces.
Following a machine polish a wax finish can be applied to most glider wings – not Pik wings
though! Check manuals to see if a wax finish is OK. Any wax applied must be silicon free for
reasons previously explained – it can interfere with repair work. It is not recommended to
apply a wax polish to fabric covered surfaces unless the paint is so thick that the weave of the
cloth has disappeared. If the weave pattern is visible, wax will lodge in the weave and be
extremely difficult to remove and it will detract from the paint finish. Also, applying pressure
to unsupported fabric whilst polishing may stretch the fabric removing the tautness.
Canopies need careful cleaning and polishing. If grubby remove it (if not already off to check
the jettison system) and wash with lots of clean water and do not rub with a hard cloth or

--- PAGE 40 ---
35
sponge. And Ladies, please remove your diamond rings - they scratch grooves even in your
car windscreen! Rubbing with a dry cloth can also impart very fine scratches which can catch
sunlight and make it impossible to see out of the cockpit.
There are a few good quality polishes for Perspex on the market, use them for final polishing.
If a scratch is to be removed you may need to use an abrasive cloth such as Micro Mesh.
Micro Mesh comes in small kit form or from the right source on a roll. The kit has a few
small pieces of abrasive cloth of different grades and a liquid polish and cotton cloth. Follow
the instructions and fine or shallow scratches can be removed. Deep scratches are a different
matter. Too much rubbing back of a deep scratch will almost certainly leave a depression
around where it was and the edges of that hollow will cause visual distortion. Sometimes
better to leave a scratch rather than suffer the inevitable distortion.

--- PAGE 41 ---
36