# Chapter 4

Flight Controls and Flight Control Systems.
This is a very interesting and important subject! We will deal with each subsection in turn as
listed in Annex 1.
Section 1
Colour Coding of Controls in the Cockpit:
You should all know the colours of individual control levers in the cockpit. Blue, green, red,
white etc. BGA Inspection 056/08/2014 covers colouring and security of control grips. It is an
Annual Check, recommend not mandatory but why ignore it. It came into being following an
accident because a control grip came off at the wrong moment and caused a bad accident. The
AAIB made a recommendation that grips should be checked for security on a regular basis.
Section 2
Control Surfaces
Glider Maintenance Manual
Inspection, Removal, Refitting and Checking Weight and Balance
Control surfaces are obviously an extremely important part of the glider and for various
reasons need to be kept in good order. Control surfaces are not removed very often but when
they are they need careful handling because they are relatively fragile components, quite light
in weight and construction and a pain to repair without exceeding weight and balance limits.
Control surfaces need inspection to ensure they are not damaged, that the hinges are free to
move and that the operating ‘horn’ is secure to the control surface. Wooden gliders usually
have fabric covered structure, occasionally the ailerons may be ply covered. The operating
horns are normally quite long protrusions of thick plywood bonded to the spar or are metal
bolted to a reinforced rib, spar or ‘D’ Box. These need to be 100% secure. Most gliders of
FRP construction have very short operating radius connections to the control surfaces and
these are normally buried within the control surface to reduce drag. Rudders often have small
protruding operating horns whilst elevators have many different types of control input
devices that are inside the fuselage or fin and thus drag does not come into the design.
Removal of control surfaces is usually covered in the Maintenance Manual of modern gliders
but with older gliders you are often left to guess how to take one off but is generally quite
obvious.
Old gliders normally have hinges connected with shackle pins and split pins, maybe nuts and
bolts through proper bearings. The main issue is the fabric gap seal system used! The T31 for
example has a doped fabric strip from the wing upper surface to the aileron lower surface.
You cannot remove the aileron without cutting the fabric. The same goes for some rudders.
More modern gliders have Mylar or Tesa Tape gap seals. Tesa Tape can be removed and
replaced easily – should be replaced every year. Mylar on the other hand is a pain when
trying to remove a control surface. It does not allow easy access to hinges, difficult to remove
and expensive to replace. Most hinges have a pin through a hinge comprising short adjacent
tubes, two generally but three adjacent to the control input. Some have needle roller bearings

--- PAGE 42 ---
37
fitted in one half of the hinge and the pin is secured either with a split pin, Tucker Pop Rivet
or a spring roll pin in the other half. Pik20 gliders have an M6 nut on the inboard hinge to
retain the control surface.
Removal then requires the operating rod or cables to be disconnected, pin or bolt locking
device to be removed from the hinge pin, split pin, rivet (drill out) or spring roll pin (drive out
with a thin pin punch). With the Pik20 once the M6 nut is removed the flap and then the
aileron (another M6 nut) can be removed by siding inboard off the hinge pins. Once off the
airframe place the control surface well supported on a rack or trestles.
Inspect the hinges for cracking or delamination from the mating surface. A good number of
hinges are made from glass fibre and bonded to the wing or tailplane and control surface just
under the top skin.
Refitting a control surface is doing everything in reverse order after lubricating hinges and
bearings!
Checking the weight and balance of a control surface is not difficult, just a bit fiddly. The
Maintenance Manual gives the weight limits and the moment about the hinge point to the
trailing edge or maybe the force required to keep the supported control surface horizontal.
Obtaining the weight of the control surface is easy – put it on a scale and weigh it. To check
the moment or force required to keep it horizontal when supported on its hinges take a little
more effort.
This page from the ASK21 Maintenance Manual shows how the task is carries out.

--- PAGE 43 ---
38
An element of skill and ingenuity allows supports for the hinge points to be made. The device
does not need to be posh just functional. I have metal strips with thin pins on as the pin does
not have to be an exact fit in or around the control surface’s hinge. These supports are – as
shown – clamped to a solid surface, bench, plank or trestle and then the weight on the trailing
edge to achieve the correct horizontal position is measured with a good spring balance
(preferably calibrated) or accurate miniature electronic scales. The spring balance is best
attached to the trailing edge by a piece of masking tape or similar and the miniature scale will
need supporting from underneath.
The best way to calibrate spring balances is to have a set of standard weights, not expensive,
and these can be hung on the balance in a bit of light fabric.
Having checked the weight and balance of each control surface one hopes all is in order!
Altering the weight and balance can be tricky, add mass balance weight and you can go over
the total weight limit. Occasionally controls are found out of limits and know that nothing has
been done to the item since it came new out of the factory! That situation is a real dilemma.
Happens more often with rudders than other surfaces.
Why do control surfaces need to be within such limits? It all has to do with a phenomenon
known as Flutter. Sometimes at high airspeeds and a bit of rough air the wing for example is
flicked upwards from its stable position. This sudden upward movement takes the aileron
with it. An unbalanced surface can allow the aileron to droop down in relation to the wing
with the aerodynamic force forcing the wing higher than the sudden gust might have taken it.
The wing then gets to a point where it overcomes the upward forces imparted to it and
springs back down. The aileron is effectively ‘left behind’ and moves upwards imparting an
aerodynamic downward force on the wing which in turn is forced further down. The process
is repeated as the wing again moves upwards causing the aileron to move down which forces
the wing further up and so the process continues and becomes self-fulfilling regardless of the
gust that started the scenario. Now this flutter is not something that happens slowly, it
happens very quickly and every oscillation gets worse in amplitude, the wing not only bends
but twists in the turmoil and then can disintegrate – just like that! Therefore these checks
need to be carried out with care to ensure that if a wing is hit by a gust the balanced aileron
does not alter its relationship with the wing. A fluttering rudder can break the rear fuselage.
Section 3
Control Cables, Construction, Manufacture and Inspection:
AC43.13-1b Section 8
AMP Leaflet 4-7
Modern gliders have control cables with ends that are generally constructed as Eye Ends held
by a NicoPress swaged sleeve. Older aircraft, particularly British ones, can be fitted with end
fittings swaged directly to the cable. Both systems need specialist tooling to complete the job,
NicoPress is common but the other type is a bit of a rarity. If you know someone with the
tooling and know how – make a note of his/her name and stay friends!
Cables come in different materials and sizes. The materials are carbon steel, plated, or
stainless steel. Carbon steel cables are slightly more flexible than stainless ones and stronger
too. Cables have different constructions, most common aircraft cables comprise 7 bundles of
wire containing 19 strands known as 7 x 19. The 7 bundles are wound into the wire ‘rope’

--- PAGE 44 ---
39
cable with a straight centre bundle and the other 6 wrapped around it. Some are 7 x 7, a much
coarser cable and not as flexible.
Old British gliders had British cables whose classification was in hundred weight – 5 cwt, 10,
15 and 20 cwt. Now we have American Cables that are classified by diameter – 1/16”, 3/32”,
1/8” and upwards. Not surprisingly these cables are manufactured to an American
Specification. EU Metric cables are measured in mm, and of course are direct equivalents of
the Imperial sizes! 1/8” = 3.2mm. They have a DIN Specification.
Sticking with imperial diameters then we have the ability to manufacture replacement cables
using the American NicoPress System. A swaging tool – usually a hand tool – squeezes a
copper sleeve onto the cable being made. An eye end would have a thimble that the cable
passes round and the sleeve is swaged on adjacent to the thimble. Depending on the diameter
of the cable and the sleeve to be used the correct part of the tool is used to impart one or more
adjacent squeezes of the tool. 3/32” cable takes 1 squeeze and an 1/8” cable takes 3. When
the sleeve has been swaged on the resultant joint is supposed to be as strong, if not stronger,
than the cable itself. Swaged sleeves should be checked for correct swaging by use of the
Go/No-Go gauge supplied with the swaging tool. Apart from different sizes of sleeve there
are two types, plain copper or plated copper. The plain copper swages are for use on carbon
steel cables whilst the plated sleeves are for stainless steel cables. The plating stops corrosion
between the stainless steel cable and the copper of the sleeve.
There are also ‘end stops’ available. These are used to terminate a cable in a handle or control
knob such as in the release cable or bicycle type brake operating lever handle.
When making up a cable it is essential to get the length correct. Some cable systems have a
turnbuckle for adjustment, some do not. Most gliders these days only use cables in the rudder
system, other controls use control rods. Cable lengths are not normally given in the manuals
so a bit of reverse engineering is required – use the old cable to get a measurement. The old
cable has probably been cut to remove it so try and be as accurate as possible in measuring.
The best way is to have a long board or boards clamped together and a fixed pin at one end
and a plate with a stud the other so that can be clamped to the board. Fit the long piece of
cable with its eye end over the fixed pin and then at the other end slip the eye end over the
movable stud and bring the cable ends together ensuring that there is hand tension on the long
section. Clamp the stud plate down.
Bearing in mind that rudder cables are supported in nylon tubes or fairleads it is impossible to
feed an eye end through the supporting guides. The cable has to be finished insitu. To get the
length correct make one eye end up on the new cable, slip that over the fixed pin on your
board and wrap the other end round the other stud. At the apex of the bend mark the cable
with a black permanent marker pen. Remove the cable from the board and feed it through the
supports ensuring that it passes through everything it should do. Do not connect it to its
securing point. The cable is usually best fed through from the cockpit end so that second eye
end can be made outside of the airframe near the rudder. Put a sleeve over the cable and
double it back, insert the thimble and arrange the cable and thimble so that the black mark
you applied is at the apex of the thimble. Swage the sleeve!
Note: Really important item. Before you pull a cable out of the airframe attach something to
it so that you can pull the new cable back through! Single core electrical cable is good for
this, remove the inner straight wire from the control cable, clean it up and solder the electrical

--- PAGE 45 ---
40
cable to the control cable. Leave sufficient control cable for this operation so that any cable
that may have been heated during the soldering can be cut off and not allowed to be part of
the finished cable. There should be no issue pulling the old cable out but ensure that the new
cable end is soldered down so that the individual wires do not catch on the supporting guides
or in the nylon tube. The control cable is a larger diameter than the electrical wire and if it
can catch on something it will. Cables with soldered ends do not go around pulleys, a pulley,
if fitted, in the system will have to be removed from its housing. Before pulling the new cable
back through the fuselage give the soldered joint a quick pull test to ensure that it is well
attached. You do not want the joint parting company halfway down the fuselage! If the cable
does get stuck give it a little tension and try again whilst twisting the cable with the lay.
Never put too much load to pull it through, pull the cable back out and check the joint and see
if sharp edges to the new cable can be lessened.
Although not noted as being essential it is worth trying to protect Pilot’s Fingers. If the cable
you are changing has a swaged sleeve adjacent to a control ball, handle or knob that the pilot
will grab hold of there is a risk that the cable end sticking out of the swaged sleeve will pierce
the skin, then it bleeds and makes a mess. To avoid that issue put a piece of suitable size
polythene tube or heat shrink on the cable before making the swage and then slip it back over
the swage to help prevent the loss of blood.
If replacing a tow release cable it is really essential to ensure that the cable is long enough for
the pilot to reach it easily. At rest there should be about 10mm slack to ensure that the release
units are not being held partially open. In gliders where the release cable exits the instrument
panel also make sure that the ‘T’ handle or ball grip does not come to rest in the gaiter around
the control column where it can then jam the controls by sinking into the aperture covered by
the gaiter.
Section 4
Inspection of Cables:
Inspection of cables requires hand-eye coordination. Look before you rub your hand and
fingers along a cable. Any broken strands will really hurt the fingers! Maybe use a piece of
rag.
Cables can be found unserviceable for several reasons:

Corrosion

Broken strands

Wear on the wire strands

Movement of a NicoPress swaged sleeve or other Swaged End Fittings
Corrosion in the form of rust is usually a cause for rejection of the cable. However, if it can
be wiped off the surface and by twisting the cable against its normal lay you can guarantee
there is no corrosion within the cable then it can remain serviceable. Rust requires moisture to
cause the corrosion, no point in rubbing off surface rust if there is a source of water to
continue the corrosion. A rusted cable has probably lost some of its anti-corrosion plating and
bare steel will rust that more rapidly. With that in mind it is probably best to render the cable
unserviceable and fit a new one - but still try and find the water access.

--- PAGE 46 ---
41
A broken strand will render a cable unserviceable and has to be changed. Broken strands are
more likely to be found where the cable goes round a pulley, through a fairlead at an angle or
where a sharp bending process may take place like the entry and exit from rudder pedal ‘S’
bends. To thoroughly inspect the cable make sure it is slack enough to see all the cable that
runs round a pulley or through the rudder pedal ‘S’ tubes. Look and then feel! Bend the cable
to see if internal strands are fractured and pop out. Bend as in ‘tight bow’ but not sufficiently
tight that the cable ends up with a kink in it.
Wear is a little more subjective. Look at places where the cable is sliding across something
like a fairlead situated in such a position that the cable changes direction on exit. This wear
puts a shine on old cables and then starts wearing through the wire strands. We are allowed
40 – 50% wear through strands of wire (not through the whole cable). Look at the worn
strands and then decide if any are worn through almost half their diameter. If in doubt change
the cable.
NicoPress sleeves once swaged correctly do not move. However, if incorrectly swaged there
is the possibility that it may move. The tail of the cable should just be protruding from the
swaged sleeve, if it is not then the cable must be replaced.
Section 5
Tensioning and Locking of Tensioning Devices
Cables in general have to be at a certain tension to operate their respective control system
effectively. Older gliders with cable operated systems often have the cable tensions listed in
the Maintenance Manual – if they have one!
Cable tension is measured by a device called a Cable Tensiometer. There are various types
from simple spring loaded tools to more complex adjustable ones. All work on the same
principle of cable deflection. There are two fixed bollards and one movable one. Slip the
cable to be checked under the two fixed bollards and over the movable one and the pointer
converts the deflection to pounds or Kilos tension. The simple spring devices will usually suit
one cable diameter whereas the more sophisticated ones can have the cable size selected.
Simple Cable Tensiometers, Used Only On Stipulated Cable Sizes
Mechanical Tensiometer, Can Be Adjusted For Different Cable Sizes By Turning The Centre Bollard

--- PAGE 47 ---
42
Cables are tensioned and adjusted by means of turnbuckles. These devices comprise a barrel
with left and a right hand thread – one at each end – and two end fittings to screw into the
barrel. The end fittings can be fork ends, eye ends, ends swaged to cables and so on. Holding
the end fittings stationary and turning the barrel will wind in or out the end fittings and thus
increase or decrease the tension in the cable.
Turnbuckles can also be used to alter the relationship between cable ends or between two
cables and the control surface. Lengthen one and shorten the other and the control surface
rests in a different position relative to the input control. For example a pair of rudder pedals
in neutral and the rudder is offset one way – say to the right. That means the right cable is too
short and the left too long. Lengthen the right turnbuckle and shorten the left and the rudder
comes back to neutral. To tension those cables both turnbuckle have to be tightened equally.
Most gliders actually have springs or bungee cord to tension rudder cables, the Puchacz is an
exception as it has a more complicated rudder system and needs tensioning.
There are gotchas in tensioning cables in different gliders. Cables, being metal, contract when
cold and expand when hot, wooden gliders expand when damp and contract when dry (winter
and summer). Cables are stronger than wood and, to a degree, GRP structures. So if you
service a glider in the summer and have cause to tension the cables come winter the tension
will increase because the cable will shrink and the wooden glider will expand! Too much
tension will break a wooden structure so take care and make some allowance in the tension.
Too much tension will also make controls stiffer and wear pulleys, too little and cables like to
try and slide off pulleys – can’t win! The Puchacz is a pain as the rudder cables form a
complete circuit going round two pulleys under the front seat panel. There is probably a little
too much tension in the cables in Tibenham’s Puchacz because if P1 puts pressure on both
pedals both cables forward of the rear pedals lose tension and then can - and have - jumped
off one of the two front pulleys jamming the system. Not good in a spinning situation. The
situation has been somewhat alleviated by replacing the easily damaged plastic pulleys with
aluminium ones.
Once adjustments have been made the turnbuckles need to be wire locked. The best is a
simple figure of eight. The locking wire starts at one end fitting through an eye or fork end,
cross over both sides of the barrel, through the hole in the middle of the barrel, cross over
again and through the other end fitting, wrap round the fitting and secure with a twist from
locking wire pliers. More examples are shown in Section 9 of the AC43.13-1b. Far too
complicated!
Some American Turnbuckles have grooves machined into the threaded portions of the barrel
and end fittings to enable locking clips to be fitted. Line up the grooves, insert the locking
clip and press the end into the barrel’s central hole. The diameter of the clip’s wire is
sufficient to prevent the end fitting from turning.
Where the end fitting is a swaged fitting on a cable the locking is achieved with lock nuts
tightened against the barrel. Not a common type in aircraft but is used extensively in Scheibe
Motor Gliders like the Falke in the brake cable system.
End fittings must also be ‘in safety’. To achieve the desired strength to support a particular
size of cable the turnbuckle has to be of a certain size. The threads of the end fittings need to
engage in the barrel by a certain distance – not just by one thread. To ensure the thread is
sufficiently engaged turnbuckles have a safety hole a short distance from the end of the

--- PAGE 48 ---
43
barrel, some older types have end fittings with short thread lengths – the entire thread has to
be inside the barrel. The end fitting must be up to or past that safety hole. This is easily
checked by feeling with a piece of locking wire into the safety hole to ensure it is blocked by
the end fitting’s thread. Ensure both end fittings are equally engaged by threading them into
the barrel simultaneously.
Section 6
Adjusting Control Systems
There are two things to adjust on any control system:

Relationship between the control input – rudder pedals or control column - and
control surface

Range of movement of the control surface

Not an adjustment but sense of movement needs to be correct too. No point pushing
the control column forward and the glider climbing as a result
The Rudder System.
The rudder system is the simplest of the control systems. Just mentioned was adjusting rudder
offset by using the turnbuckles in two cables to alter the relationship between the rudder
pedals and the rudder. With the cable systems the turnbuckles are generally the only devices
that can be adjusted. However, occasionally link plates with several holes set in a zig-zag
pattern (to enable short adjustments of length) are used. The ASK21 has such plates in use
with the Hand Rudder Modification.
Some gliders have control rods to operate the rudder but the system often starts with cables at
the pedals. The Astir starts off with cables and these are attached to a bar behind the wheel
box, from there to the rudder is a control rod.
The first thing to adjust is the relative position between the pedals and the rudder. This is by
turnbuckles or eye end fittings in the control rod. Eye ends in control rods are either rose
bearings (rod end bearings) or connecting fork ends. The bearings are screwed into fixed
threads in the control rod and locked by a lock nut. As with turnbuckle end fittings the thread
must be in safety – there is a safety hole for the purpose of determining threads are correctly
engaged.
To adjust a rod end bearing it is necessary to disconnect the joint it forms with a fork end.
(Fork ends are quite often welded to a control rod). To adjust the bearing first hold the control
rod or the rod end bearing with a spanner on the flats provided and undo the lock nut. Do not
try and undo the nut whilst allowing the torque to be taken by the control rod. The bearing
should then turn easily on its threaded ‘stalk’. Undo the bearing to lengthen the rod and screw
it in to shorten. Job done is when the pedals and the rudder are both in neutral.
Then we move on to the range of movement stops, all controls have a stop of some sort. The
appearance of stops varies considerably, old gliders can have two pieces of ‘plastic’ material
bolted to the cable to clamp the cable and then stop on an adjacent frame, a Dart for example.
Some systems have bolts screwed into structure close to the control input rudder pedal whilst
others have adjustable stops at the rudder end. Some gliders like K13s have fixed stops built
into the lower rudder hinge. Others may have adjustable bolts with a lock nut.

--- PAGE 49 ---
44
The Maintenace Manual and the Type Certificate Data Sheet notes the control deflections,
they are repeated for convenience on the BGA Data Sheets. Ranges of Movement are given
as a distance or angular measurement from the control surface neutral position.
The Elevator
The elevator system is relatively easy to adjust, finding and establishing a neutral position is
not always easy though. Looking along the end of the elevator and tailplane you can get the
chord line straight, sometimes neutral is the top surface of the tailplane and elevator in line.
Getting the control column neutral is also a bit of guess work and should be halfway between
the forward and aft movement. Adjust the stops and it all changes! Establish the neutral
position of the elevator and control column to your satisfaction. Adjusting the system to
neutral is very similar to the rudder system. Using a inclinometer or a long straight edge to
reach the elevator from the floor, note the neutral. Pull the control column back and note the
distance, linear or angular and then the forward movement.
Elevator control stops are invariably in the cockpit either adjacent to the control column or
not far along the control run. Adjustment to increase or decrease the range of movement is to
screw in or out the adjusting screws. Some gliders have fixed elevator stops and cannot be
adjusted without usually bonding on a piece of plywood – most fixed stops are ply.
The Ailerons
Ailerons are a law unto themselves. So many points where you can adjust the system to
achieve the desired result. The adjustments can be made:

Between the control column and the centre section controls

At the centre section controls

In the wing

Outer wing drive quadrant

Final Drive Rod

At the control stops
Ailerons have unequal travel up and down to counteract Adverse Yaw (differential ailerons).
This is achieved by the use of a quadrant to turn spanwise movement of the control system to
chordwise and connect to the aileron. The quadrant converts linear movement to rotary
movement and then back to linear movement but not an equal amount. The following
diagram shows what happens:

--- PAGE 50 ---
45
The net result is that the final drive rod has more linear movement to push the aileron up than
it does to pull the aileron down. That then provides the differential aileron movement.
To adjust the ailerons to neutral along with the control column it is easiest, but not essential,
to work from the ailerons back to the control column. It is absolutely necessary that both the
outer wing quadrants are set in exactly the correct angular position.
Get the quadrants correct and then bring the ailerons into neutral using the adjustment in the
final drive rod. With a control lock or clamp, lock the ailerons in neutral. If you cannot get
both ailerons locked in neutral disconnect one of the last control rods in the fuselage to wing.
Lock that aileron.
Working on the aileron system that is still connected to the control column, adjust the final
drive rod to the junction of fuselage to wing system and get the control column neutral. Then
adjust the disconnected control rod until it can be connected without force to its connecting
point with the aileron still locked in neutral.
Now, in theory if you have the quadrants set up correctly the ailerons should have the same
range of movement each. It might not be the range of movement required but they should be
the same.
Adjust the control stops that are usually close to the control column to give the correct range
of movement to one aileron – then check the other aileron. Unfortunately when you adjust the
‘Up’ stop for one aileron you are adjusting the ‘Down’ stop for the other and vice versa. Now
go back and adjust the stops for the second aileron. Check the range of movement again for
both ailerons and if not far adrift go for a happy medium and get it all in tolerance. If the
differential movement is excessive or insufficient then the quadrant is not correctly set up so
you have to start again.
The aileron up-down relationship is due entirely to the quadrant. This can be adjusted for
each aileron by lengthening or shortening the wing spanwise control rod. However any
adjustment there will put the aileron neutral out of kilter and that has to be rectified by
adjusting the final drive rod.
Setting up the aileron system can take time and a good understanding of how the system
operates; which point of adjustment alters both ailerons in the same way, which alters both in

--- PAGE 51 ---
46
different ways and which alters one aileron but not the other. If you can get a good grasp of
the geometry of the system that is a bonus and helps deciding where and what to adjust.
Flaps and Flaperons.
Some gliders have plain flap systems whilst others can have a flap that also moves as an
aileron – hence Flaperons.
Plain flaps are relatively simple to adjust. One control input is fed equally to each wing. To
adjust both flaps simultaneously the adjustment is made prior to the split left and right flaps
in the centre section. If with the flap lever in neutral one flap is not in neutral then that flap
can be adjusted to neutral without affecting the other flap. Lever neutral and both flaps out of
position by the same amount then the first rod from the flap lever can be adjusted.
Flaperons and ‘mixer boxes’ are something else! These are sent to try us as they have
differential quadrants built in but they don’t look like quadrants, numerous adjustable links
and bits that look as if they should be fixed – move!
In order to make any adjustment here you really do need to stop and have a really good think
about the system and how it all operates. A little adjustment can make a lot of difference and
maybe achieve something you did not want or expect.
Adjusting any control system takes two people, the owner or helper to move the cockpit
controls while you do the measuring. Flaperons can have hidden issues if you are not careful.
A recent check on an LS6C-18 showed all movements were good but not all was as it
seemed. Double check that the person operating the controls has the correct flap settings
applied whilst checking the movements. The issue that was nagging the Inspector was
eventually found: it was that the system had been previously set up to put the control surfaces
in neutral but with the flap lever set to the first negative setting. This meant that the flaps had
5 or 10 degrees of flap when the flap lever was in neutral. Two or three adjustments had to be
made to correct the situation. Don’t just assume that everything is OK!
Section 7
Inspection of Control Systems, Rods, Bearings and Locking
Inspecting control systems can be broken down into different aspects:

Control Cables

Control rods

Bearings

Locking of Critical Joints
Control cables were dealt with earlier.
Control Rods are generally tubes rather than solid rods and of aluminium alloy or steel.
Inspecting the rods we are looking for:

Physical damage – has it been bent by a heavy foot, scored by an incorrectly placed
screw or a seized bearing in a triple bearing support.

Is it corroded

--- PAGE 52 ---
47

Loose end fittings
Some gliders, like the Pik20 for example, can have the elevator or aileron control rod just
under the left cockpit seat side scored by retaining the seat at that point with a standard length
screw instead of a short one. A good number of modern gliders have the control rods
supported in ‘triple roller assemblies’ comprising 3 nylon faced ball bearing races. If the ball
bearing race seizes up it can wear a flat on the tube not to mention making the control system
very stiff.
Most control rods do not get physically damaged other than by corrosion. Vertical elevator
rods in fins are prone to corrosion and control rods in cockpits that are not covered by a panel
get rubbed, paint comes off and corrosion sets in. The Grob gliders and motor gliders all have
special inspections to perform on the elevator drive rods. The Grob G109 actually has a steel
bar weight inside the vertical elevator drive rod as a Mass Balance Weight. Something that
was not looked at when checking mass and balance of control surfaces. The balance weight
of a control surface may not necessarily be on the control surface.
Control rods have end fittings to link to the next control rod. These can be welded on fork
ends or Rod End Bearings – a bearing on a threaded stalk (male or female thread). The
threaded stalk has to be secured in a ‘nut’ on the end of the rod. Some of these end fittings are
inserts in the tube secured by a pin, rivet or nut and bolt or by swaging the tube into grooves
machined into the end fitting. Check that these are not loose and that any threaded end fitting
secured with a lock nut is secure and the lock nut tight.
Bearings
The bearings used in control rod systems are:

Rod End Bearings

Plain Spherical Bearings

Self-Aligning Double Row Bearings

Sealed Single Row Bearings
Images Courtesy of Simply Bearings Ltd
Open bearings are often protected with felt washers which also hold an element of lubricating
oil. The other common type of bearing, albeit a link device, is the L’Hotellier Connector.
L’Hotellier Connectors have wear limits and the ball connector must be measured every
annual servicing and their locking devices checked.
Most Maintenance Manuals have a lubrication chart detailing which bearings require
lubricating and with which lubricant, oil or grease. L’Hotellier Connectors need greasing, if
they get dry they are very stiff to operate and also wear quickly.

--- PAGE 53 ---
48
Bearings that are stiff to operate should be replaced but stiffness is sometimes a lack of
lubrication!
Self-Aligning Double Row Ball Bearings need special attention as they occasionally lose ball
bearings from the cage should the cage be clear of the outer race at any time. Missing ball
bearings become a loose article.
Any corrosion on the bearing is a cause for rejection.
Wheel bearings in Tost wheels are plain sealed bearings and should be checked off aircraft
for defects such as stiffness, gritty or lumpy operation and damage to the seals. Change the
bearings if showing signs of defect, a bearing seizing up on landing could spoil anyone’s day.
Cleveland wheels use taper roller bearings and are used on the ASK21 and others. These
bearings, and some open bearings fitted to vintage gliders, need cleaning, inspecting and
regreasing annually. Use something like Brake and Clutch Cleaner for removing the old
grease – warning, it also removes natural grease from your hands! Taper Roller Bearings
must be clean and free from chips and bluing on the rollers and on the outer race. With the
bearing assembled it must turn smoothly. Pack with grease before refitting to the wheel but
do not overdo the amount of grease used.
Section 8
Locking Devices, How and Why
Safetying: AC 43.13-1B Section 7
Locking of all parts of a control system is an absolute necessity to prevent a disconnection in
flight. The following devices and methods are all common in flight control systems:

Locking Wire

Split Pins

Tab Washers

Self-locking Nuts (Stiff Nuts)

Spring Washers

Special Locking Devices used on L’Hotellier connectors and similar Ball Joints
Locking Wire:
See Reference AC 43.13-1B Section 7
Locking wire as used in the UK is stainless steel, copper has been/is used by ‘Eastern Block’
countries but the general use of copper has gone. Copper is however, used for tell-tale locking
of things like canopy jettison systems so that you can see if the system has been disturbed and
it is easy to break in an emergency.
Locking wire is used predominately on bolts, fittings and hose banjo bolts to prevent the
component undoing itself. Securing one bolt, the wire is passed through a hole in the bolt
head and twisted and wound clockwise round the bolt head to another hole in the structure or
a tab washer. If the bolt has a left hand thread then the wire is wound anticlockwise. Basically
it goes in the direction used to tighten the bolt. Wire locking two or more bolts together is an
extension of the same theme but there is no need to start or finish the locking on structure.
The wrap of wire round the head should ideally be 180 degrees although this does not seem

--- PAGE 54 ---
49
stated in the reference material. The last thing to do when wire locking is to bend the end
over and tuck it out of the way, it avoids bloodshed and ripped clothing.
Locking wire pliers are an ideal tool to possess. If you can afford one a tool with reversible
twist action is useful. Locking two bolts together as mentioned in Fig 7.5 reversing the
direction of twist in the wire helps keep the loop of wire round the bolt head.
Split Pins – Cotter Pins in American Speak
See Reference AC 43.13-1B Section 7
Split Pins are used to lock nuts and bolts where there is the possibility of relative movement
between the parts being secured together. The nuts are either slotted or castellated. Slotted
ones are standard thickness with slots cut across opposite flats whilst castellated nuts have an
extension above the basic nut.
Methods of fitting split pins are shown in the reference, again to avoid bloodshed try to keep
the tail ends tucked well in.
Aircraft Split Pins are readily available from suppliers such as LAS Aerospace Ltd and come
in numerous diameters and lengths. Try to avoid using ones from your local Motor Factors,
quality is sometimes dubious and some are plated steel, not stainless. You can use the LAS
Website as a reference book, the system could be better in searching for your requirement, it
often comes up with items corresponding to one word you have typed in the search box. They
may still produce a catalogue of parts. Aircraft Spruce may still do a catalogue too, that is a
good reference book.
Like everything in the aircraft world split pins have a part number. These are SP90 -. The
letter and numbers following the – represent the diameter and length from 3/32” to 3/16”
diameter and ¼” to 2.5” long. These along with loads of other small components come under
the British category of AGS Parts (Aircraft General Standards). I will deal with AGS,
American and EU hardware later.
Split pins can also be used to stop washers falling off the ends of rods as in Astir
undercarriage pivot rods, securing clevis pins and control hinge pins. Other uses are
available!
Tab Washers
Tab Washers are devices that sit under the head of a nut or bolt just like a washer but have
tabs protruding from the periphery. The common AGS tab washer has 3 tabs, one pre-bent to
lock into a hole or over an edge and two to bend up against the side of a nut.
Some tab washers are more specialised as are the MB series of tab washers. These are
designed to sit on large diameter shafts such as wheel axles and under nuts classified in the
KM range. The KM7 and MB7 are used on the Grob G109 mainwheels and size 6 on the
Scheibe Falke. Please note from the pictures that the nut has a conical face and sits in the cup
shape of the tab washer. The conical face is the face that is making contact with the item
being tightened, in this case the main wheel! For some reason good number of people want
to use the flat face against the cupped washer! (No accounting for taste)!

--- PAGE 55 ---
50
KM7 and MB7
The tab in the centre fits in a groove in the shaft and then once fitted and tightened you align
one tab with a slot in the nut and bend it into that slot. With 17 tabs and 4 slots there is always
one that just about aligns. Use a decent C Spanner on the nut, not a drift or screwdriver and
hammer! Take care when tightening not to catch and bend the tabs.
Self-Locking Nuts
AC 43.13-1B Page 7-63
CAP562 CAAIP Leaflets E30 & E40
CAIP Leaflets BL2-3 (Bolts and Screws) and BL2-6 (Nuts)
Self-Locking Nuts come in many different forms the most common of which is the Nyloc
Nut. Self-locking nuts all have one thing in common – a distorted thread pattern or in the
Nyloc’s case a piece of nylon into which a thread pattern is formed by the bolt.
The AC 43.13-1B sketches no end of American Nuts, unfortunately CAP562 CAAIP Leaflets
only deals with British Bolts! Leaflet E30. Also deals with American Bolts in Leaflet E40.
However, the old, now superseded CAIP Leaflets, do cover Nuts! Leaflet BL/2-6. The AGS
system has been superseded but the part numbers remain the same.
Stiff Nuts or Self-Locking Nuts are just that – stiff to turn on or off. They are used where
there is no relative movement between the secured parts such as when clamping a bearing or
bush between two surfaces like a rudder operating horn where a rudder cable is free to move
on a secured bush – K21 and others. It would not be used to secure a moving arm to a stud or
on a stud securing a rudder to a hinge through a bush where the stud moved and the bush is
stationary – SF25C or Venture rudder for example.
Stiff nuts eventually wear out. They should be replaced when the friction is found low and
definitely if you can turn the nut with your fingers. If in doubt replace it, not that expensive
compared to the consequences of losing the nut as a loose article and a bolt free to remove
itself from its desired location in a control system. Replace like for like is the best policy.
Nyloc nuts are often found in gliders but they should not be used if they could get hot and
destroy the nylon locking. Some all-metal stiff nuts have deformed threads by stamping
detents on one side of the nut adjacent to the thread, others have slots cut into the nut and the
formed tag bent down whilst others have the upper part of the nut squeezed in a little. A
common stiff nut in Polish gliders has an extension above the hexagonal part, slotted and
squeezed in.
Spring Washers
Spring washers are not really locking devices but are used to prevent plain nuts vibrating
loose. They are devices that dig into the nut and the item the nut is being tightened onto.
Crude but effective. Some have multiple teeth either internally or externally whilst others are

--- PAGE 56 ---
51
split and twisted open with a cross section form oblong or square. Another type is a wavey
washer – spring steel and deformed to make a wave form around it.
In gliders they are found securing lock nuts on rod end bearings against the control rod and
the Astir has one under the locking nut on the ‘Ball Bolt’ that secures the tailplane.
L’Hotellier Connector Locking Devices.
LBAAD1993-001/3
Glider Flight and Maintenance Manuals
There are different locking devices used to secure L’Hotellier Connectors.

‘R’ Clips

LS Safety Sleeve

Wedekind Sleeves

Schempp Hirth Locking Springs

Uerlings Sleeves
R Clips are the most common items used to lock the connectors, simply put the clip through
the hole provided in the locking plate.
LS Safety Sleeves wind over the connector ball and prevent the ball from exiting the socket.
Wedekind Sleeves are sleeves that slide back to allow the locking plate to be unlocked and
the connector to be connected and then they spring back over the plate to prevent that moving
to the unlocked position.
Schempp Hirth Locking Springs are a sophisticated version of the R Clip. It is attached to the
control rod in such a position that it can be inserted into the hole in the locking plate easily
and also withdrawn to allow connection/disconnection of the connector.
Uerlings Sleeves are plastic devices that slide over the connector in such a way that the Ball
cannot move out of the socket. Not the best locking device in the world as being plastic they
are prone to breaking.
Another type of Ball and Socket Joint is commonly used on engine controls on motor gliders.
They are similar to L’Hotellier Connectors but do not have the same Locking Plate system.
The ball is pushed into the socket past a retaining spring and extracted the same way thus the
spring is not a locking device, it just retains the ball. To lock the ball in the socket there is a
pin with built it clip that slides through two holes across the socket opening and is then
turned to secure the pin’s clip around the shaft of the socket. The pin is situated near the stalk
of the ball and the ball cannot come past it. Installation is easy if you can see the two holes. It
is necessary to ensure that the pin has fully entered the second hole, it is easy to misalign the
pin and miss entering the second hole.
Section 9
Gap Sealing
Gap sealing is a necessity! It is achieved in a variety of ways:

--- PAGE 57 ---
52

Close fitting control surfaces to the parent surface.

Fabric doped top of parent surface to underside of control surface

Internal flexible seal between control and parent surface

Adhesive tapes over the hinge line (Tesa Tape)

Mylar Tapes
Gap sealing is necessary to prevent high pressure air flowing to the low pressure side of a
surface, aileron underside to top surface, likewise the elevator and then left or right deflection
of a rudder.
Close Fitting Control Surfaces
Close fitting control surfaces are normally found on older gliders and some rudders.
Schleicher ASK13 gliders for example have no gap sealing requirement. Jubi ones with
aileron hinges mounted on the top surface do. The T21 glider has a bead of wood on the
control surface and the parent surface at the hinge line and this close fit ‘rolls’ over the joint
as the control surface moves maintaining a very narrow gap.
Fabric Sealing
This type of sealing is only found on some older fabric covered gliders such as the T31; it is
employed on a number of light aircraft as well.
A classic ‘I Learned about Gap Sealing’ was experienced by the Author in 1965 in Aden. His
first solo aircraft job was dumped on him within minutes of joining the Aden Services
Gliding Club: This T31, stripped of fabric, is in need of some wood repairs and recovering
with Madapolam to become serviceable before you can have a site check as it will be the only
2-seater that is serviceable! Jack Harrison (Weather Jack as some of you may know him) was
CFI and he and guys stripped the fabric off the T31.
To cut a long story short the work was completed and the T31 was transported to the Desert
Airfield at Sheik Othman on a 3-ton lorry as the glider did not have a trailer. It was rigged
and launched with Jack at the controls. Pleased to see his solo handywork airborne he went to
see Jack and make sure everything went OK. No it did not! The ailerons free and easy to
operate on the ground needed TWO HANDS to operate once airborne. A look round the
aileron system revealed a 360 degree wrap in the cables in the right wing. Probably due to
being rotated whilst on/off the lorry. Many apologies, all correctly rigged, wire locked etc and
off Jack went again. No difference at all. The ailerons were adjusted by drooping them,
raising them all with no effect. Jack then let the Author fly with him and it was confirmed
that it did indeed need two hands to operate the ailerons even a little bit – it was horrible -
whilst the elevator was as light as a feather. Having run out of height, speed and ideas the T31
was stacked off the runway. Half an hour later some bright spark suggested that there should
be a fabric seal between the wing and the aileron. Eureka! Not having removed the fabric the
Author had not even thought about a gap seal, the gap on a T31 is about 1 inch or more. A
fabric strip was duly doped to the wing and aileron and Jack and he flew again. Result!
Ailerons were as light as a feather!

--- PAGE 58 ---
53
The T31
Internal Flexible Seals
Internal flexible seals are strips of impregnated fabric stuck to the control surface and the
parent structure. The LS4 has such an arrangement used in conjunction with Mylar Seals.
Some gliders use a much larger piece of fabric to seal the rudder gap and if you are going to
remove the rudder for inspection I suggest it is partially removed and supported adjacent to
the fin whilst the inspection is caried out.
Adhesive Tapes
The most popular tape is Tesa Tape for sealing across control gaps where the hinge line is on
the top surface. Some people do not like it and say it shrinks too much after application and
can prevent full control deflection. If applied incorrectly it can. Being fabric tape with an
adhesive backing when you pull it off the roll it stretches. The trick is to warm the roll before
peeling tape off it, not hot or the adhesive will stay on the top surface of the layer beneath the
one being peeled; then pull off 2 – 3 feet at a time and hold it for 45 - 60 seconds and let it
shrink back to the way it was on the roll. Apply the tape to one half of the joint – the wing,
tailplane or fin – and then with the control surface at full deflection run your thumb along the
tape over the hinge line causing a depression in the tape and then stick it to the control
surface, the depression is essential. Over the year to the next Annual Inspection the tape will
shrink a little spanwise and maybe imperceptibly chordwise but will not prevent full
deflection. When removing the tape from the aircraft use a hot air gun to warm it as you peel
it off the surface. Again do not make it hot or a lot of the adhesive will stay on the surface.
Use U-Pol Degreasant to remove the adhesive residue.
Other tapes are available! The BGA Shop used to sell something akin to bodge tape, Duct
Tape and some others are used. However, experience shows that Duct Tape does not weather
well and leaves an enormous amount of adhesive residue behind and that is a real pain to
remove.
Mylar Tapes
Mylar Tapes are a common sight on modern gliders to seal control gaps, one on top and one
below. They are a stiff but flexible plastic and stuck to the primary surface with double sided
adhesive tape. The seal is effective because whether the air is trying to go up or down one

--- PAGE 59 ---
54
seal will be forced against the control surface to seal the gap. The leading edge of a Mylar
seal is protected by the addition of a thin self-adhesive tape. This tape protects the edge from
the airflow and from water ingress.
Mylar Tapes have now been developed to have Turbulator effects on the leading edge (not
covered by thin tape) and also as stand-alone turbulator tapes. All the tapes are available from
Glasfaser-Flugzeug-Service GmbH on their website: https//streifly.de/en/home. The Curved
Mylar Tapes come in different widths and with or without the double sided adhesive tape
attached. It is easier to put the double sided tape on the aircraft and then put the Mylar onto
that, you have more control over it. The double sided tape has very strong adhesive properties
and if the Mylar goes a little astray with the adhesive tape on it, it is very difficult to get back
on track.
These are excellent tapes but they have some drawbacks:

The tapes hide hinges making inspection and lubrication difficult

Difficult to remove and clean off adhesive residue

Expensive to replace
Section 10
Range of Movement Checks
At every Annual Servicing the range of movement of the control surfaces has to be checked
thus ensuring the pilots who fly the glider have every chance of maintaining control whatever
the circumstances thrust upon him or her.
The range of movement is given in the Maintenance Manual, in the BGA Data Sheets and in
most if not all TCDS. The range of movement is given in mm at a certain radius from the
hinge point or an angular deflection from neutral. Unflapped gliders are relatively easy to
check, the radius from the hinge line is almost always the inboard end of the control surface
or the full width of the rudder.
The best tool for measuring the aileron movement is a vernier gauge, simply ask your
accomplice to move the aileron fully up or down and measure the distance top surface to top
surface at the trailing edge and then reverse the control surface and repeat the exercise. Do
both ailerons and check that both are in neutral together. The elevator is not quite so easy, you
need a long straight edge to reach the elevator of a Tee Tail, not quite so long if the
elevator/tailplane is mounted lower down. Judge the neutral position and mark the straight
edge, then fully up and fully down. Measure the distances. The rudder requires some masking
tape to stick on the floor and a plumb bob. Get the rudder neutral, drop a plumb line, mark the
tape. Do the same left and right and then measure the distances. If the range of movement is
given in degrees then you need an inclinometer. A small electronic one is ideal, those with a
magnetic base are best as you can stick a thin steel plate to the control surface with masking
tape and the inclinometer will stay put. (A Wixey).
It is necessary to operate the controls from the cockpit and not at the control surface thus
ensuring that any control restrictions become obvious.
Gliders with flaps or flaperons are more difficult to check as there are usually up/down
checks at different flap settings. On paper make up a table and note the figures down.

--- PAGE 60 ---
55
Trim tabs are best measured with the elevator in neutral as some trim tabs are not just trim
tabs but balance tabs. There are several different Tabs used in aviation on different aircraft:

Fixed Trim Tabs

Adjustable Trim Tabs

Balance Tabs

Anti-Balance Tabs

Servo Tabs

However, a lot of gliders do not have aerodynamic trim tabs but rely on spring systems. Trim
tabs cause drag and gliders are designed to have the least drag possible.
Fixed trim tabs can be adjusted on the ground by bending them at the trailing edge of the
control surface whilst adjustable trim tabs can be altered in flight. Their position relative to
the control surface does not change with control surface movement.
Balance Tabs are adjustable in flight but move in relation to the control surface when that is
moved. The K13 elevator has a balance tab – move the elevator and the trim tab moves in the
opposite direction. Elevator up – trim tab moves down. Applies more force in the direction of
control surface travel thus reducing the load required to move the control surface.
Anti-Balance tabs are similar to Balance Tabs except that they move in the same direction as
the control surface. Elevator up – trim tab up. Applies force against the direction of control
surface travel thus increasing the load required to move the control surface.
Servo Tabs are not really trim tabs. They are the part connected to the control column. The
control surface is not connected to the control column, it is basically free-floating. The servo
tab is moved and the aerodynamic force is used to move the main control surface and then
that acts on the aircraft. Aileron servo tab moved down – aileron moves up – aircraft rolls
towards the ‘up’ aileron. Not found on gliders!
Some gliders also require minimum distances for the airbrakes or spoilers to move when
open.
Section 11
Independent or Duplicate Inspections
AMP 1-4
The AMP Leaflet referenced above is very clear on the requirements of the Independent or
Duplicate Inspection. Follow that and you cannot go too far wrong.
Each and every inspection needs to be very specific as to which joint or nut/bolt has been
inspected. The words used can be varied to suit a particular occasion. Duplicate Inspections
can be recorded on one or more sheets as required or inserted into the worksheet below the
statement of work done. An example of such duplicate inspections is on the next page, in this
case all the inspections are on a dedicated Duplicate Inspections worksheet.

--- PAGE 61 ---
56
The BGA now recommends taking a photo of the inspected item for future reference or
inclusion in the Workpack if printing from a computer. Digital photos are now so easy to take
and store/print.

--- PAGE 62 ---
57