# Chapter 5

Electrical Systems
FAA-H-8083-30B, Chapter 12 (Also for Part66 Module 1L.3)
AMP 1-11
Section 1
General Description and Components
Electrical Systems in gliders are relatively simple, one or two batteries feed power to
the instrument panel(s) and on to instruments via switches and fuses or circuit
breakers.
One thing to note is that if some wiring is made redundant take it out, don’t leave it in
the glider! Too often wound up coils of wire are left insitu ‘just in case’ it is needed in
the future. One guy asked for advice about his glider’s wiring - rip it all out and start
again! The next day he appeared with one length of wire about 3 feet long comprising
4 or 5 bits soldered together! Try to avoid solder as a means of connecting two
conductors, if you have a high resistance the solder can melt and the joint broken.
Having said that most plugs and sockets rely on soldered joints.
A simple circuit will comprise a battery complete with a fuse on the battery feeding the
instrument panel via two wires, one positive, the other negative. The panel should have
a Master Switch in the positive line, a Master Fuse and that will feed across to all the
fuses, one per instrument. From the fuse there next comes a switch and then on to the
instrument. The negative supply does not need a fuse or switch and the various
instruments can be connected to one negative terminal.
If two batteries are carried then arrangements need to be made for battery selection – a
Master Switch of the On-Off-On variety. Centre position is OFF whilst up and down is
ON. Battery 1 and 2. Alternatively you can fit a double pole switch that will turn on
both positive supplies and then have the battery selection at each individual instrument
switch. It is a choice for the Owner but the first option takes less wiring up. Note that
the power from two batteries can be carried by three wires, two positive, one from each
battery and one common for the negative supply.
If creating a new wiring system sit down and thing about what you are intending to
achieve. Apart from Power In you generally need:

Radio comprising:
o
Transceiver
o
PTT
o
Microphone
o
Speaker
o
Aerial

FLARM comprising
o
FLARM Unit
o
Flarm Display
o
Aerial

Electric Vario

--- PAGE 63 ---
58

GPS - Tablet

Turn and Slip and/or Artificial Horizon
It is best to connect the instruments to a terminal block of the Barrier type. These have
screw terminals that take 4mm ring terminals. Crimp the ring terminals onto the
instrument wires and then to the terminal block. This makes removing an instrument
easy – no need to unsolder wires.
Miniature circuit breakers are readily available, a good type is ETA Circuit Breakers.
They come in different current ratings just like fuses. They are easy to fit and have
small spade connectors for the wires.
Wires also have current ratings. The wire gauge needed for an instrument is often
stipulated in the equipment manual. Aircraft standard wiring is readily available but is
all white. Radios come with ‘normal’ wire and the use of good quality commercial wire
is acceptable. Wire is usually categorised by AWG – American Wire Gauge. The higher
the gauge number the thinner the wire and the less current it can carry.
Instrument Panels need to be removed occasionally for access to rudder pedals for
example or to change an instrument. Power supply and ‘off-panel’ radio items need to
be disconnected so use a plug and socket for these circuits. There are several makes of
bulkhead sockets and line plugs available to do the job, just don’t hard wire to
switches.
The components you need for a decent electrical system are:

Battery

Fuse or circuit breaker for the battery

Master Switch

Miniature circuit breakers, one per instrument (Type ETA 106-P10 Series RS or
Farnell)

ON-OFF Switches, one per instrument

Wires of different sizes and colours

Barrier Terminal Blocks (Farnell)

4mm Ring Terminals (Solistrand is a good make – RS Components)

Bulkhead Sockets with X number of pins

Line mounted Plugs with matching X number of pins

Appropriate Crimp Tooling

Heat Shrink Tubing for insulation purposes

Hot Air Gun

Multimeter
Take the time to draw a circuit diagram, it helps you and anyone who wants to
understand what is going on behind the panel. An example of a wiring diagram is
below. Note that as a precaution of disrupting the power supply to the IGC FLARM
there is a capacitor introduced into the circuit. The capacitor acts as a small battery and
will maintain power for sufficient time to cover switching from Battery 1 to Battery 2
whilst the switch passes through the OFF position.

--- PAGE 64 ---
59
Section 2
Inspection of Electrical Systems
Electrical systems correctly installed and maintained are inherently safe. However, if
badly installed and left to chafe on a hard edge or get to a stage with old wiring that the
insulation starts to disintegrate then short circuits can occur. A short circuit creates
heat, high currents and in the worst case – fire.
Inspection of wiring is necessary to ensure that there is no chaffing, wire and looms are
correctly secured and that insulation is not breaking down. Also check that the owner
has not added his/her own bit of wire and chocolate box connector, practical things but
not very nice and are rarely secured.
Check that fuse ratings are correct, circuit breakers should not change their rating.
Make sure the switches work and are not loose in the panel. Switches, fuses and/or
circuit breakers should be labelled to show what they control. Radios must have the
glider registration noted adjacent to it.
Damaged wires or components should be replaced, replace wires end to end, don’t just
cut out a bit and solder in a new piece. If you have to pull wire out of a conduit –
solder a scrap piece to the end so you can pull the new wire back through. Sometimes
in a two seat glider as per K21 where wires go front to rear panels maybe leave a
length of wire in the conduit tied out of the way. This makes threading a new wire
through easier if something is being added to a panel.
Electrical components should be replace like for like rather than trying to fit something
new.

--- PAGE 65 ---
60
Battery Boxes need to be inspected for security and their ability to restrain a battery
whilst undergoing a 25G force! In a crash situation things are bad enough without a
2Kg battery being hurled at you from the centre section. A shallow tray with a piece of
‘Velcro’ (Hook and Loop Fabric Tape) to hold a battery down is quite insufficient. A
box secured to the structure with two self-tapping screws is also pretty useless no
matter how good the actual box is. Use nuts and bolts to secure a box to the structure
and put large diameter washers under the structure or an aluminium plate to spread the
load.
Section 3
Battery Charging and Testing
AMP 1-11
Battery charging should be undertaken outside of the glider just in case anything goes
wrong, applies especially to the Lithium batteries. An appropriate battery charger
should be used, there are several makes of ‘automatic’ chargers that charge and then
keep a float charge going thus not wrecking the battery. Most Clubs have battery
charging facilities adjacent to the gliders in the hangar, left on charge and removed and
put into the glider when required.
As the AMP Leaflet says we should know what the capacity of the battery is and to
know that the battery is given a capacity test. Rarely carried out in the gliding world! It
is a time consuming process and currently there does not seem to be a way of doing it
with automatic recording. Somone somewhere must have a system for doing that.
However, the Leaflet tells you how to carry out a capacity test and work out the result.
With gliders if a battery does not last long enough a complaint will be forthcoming if it
is a club glider; the owner, Club or Private, may just buy a new battery.
If a new battery loses power quickly during a flight then one must assume there is a
power drain. Sometimes difficult to find and isolate the cause. One K21 apparently
always drained batteries quickly, despite inserting an ammeter into the positive line at
the battery and not getting any high amperage readings with any combinations of
switched on instruments the issue remained unresolved.
Batteries that have been dropped should be carefully examined to ensure they have not
suffered a cracked case. If in doubt scrap it and get another – not that expensive.
Batteries for engine starting should ideally be tested particularly those in Self-
launching Sailplanes or Turbos. These batteries need to function as soon as the pilot
requires it to avoid a field landing! TMG batteries are not often required in flight and if
not in good condition will object to starting a cold engine on the ground. Take the time
and do the test.
If an apparently good battery fails to produce the necessary energy required to turn an
engine over check the connection to the battery terminals; there could be a high
resistance between the terminal and cable terminal or cable and its crimped terminal.
This condition can be established with an Ohm Meter or feeling the junction to see if it
is warm or hot if current has been flowing for an extended period. Of course the
problem may be in the Starter Solenoid Switch. The solenoid may appear to function
(in that it is heard to engage the switch) but the metal plate that actually makes the

--- PAGE 66 ---
61
electrical connection may be ‘burnt’. Some solenoid switches are not too difficult to
strip down and clean, most are easy to replace.

--- PAGE 67 ---
62