# Chapter 6

Avionics Systems
AC 43.13-1B, Chap 12 Sect 1 - 3
AMP Leaflet 1-7 – Transponders
Avionics covers the ‘Black Boxes’ we carry in the glider to assist us communicating and
navigating whilst flying.
Section 1
Transceivers
Transceivers or Radios as they are commonly referred to have now become a sophisticated
and a ‘must have’ piece of equipment for every glider. Transceivers in the gliding world have
gone from nothing aboard to Pye Bantams with three or four radio channels dedicated to
gliding frequencies, 720 Chanel sets and now to 8.33 Mhz Channel Spacing sets, we can talk
to anyone!
Whilst internally they are a mystery to most folks, externally they require wires. All modern
transceivers have two connections, maybe three if in a 2-seat glider. They are a multi-pin plug
and an aerial BNC Connector. In a 2-seat glider there is probably a third plug to connect to a
remote control in the rear panel.
The aerial socket is a standard BNC socket and connects directly to the aerial lead. Modern
gliders have built in aerials (in the fin) and a coaxial cable to the front cockpit. The coaxial
cable should not be kinked or bent sharply. Either of those defects could break the insulation
leading to a short circuit, loss of transmission and reception and even worse possibly wreck
the transceiver itself. Nor should the coax cable be included in a wiring loom containing
power cables and microphone cables.
The multi pin plug carries everything else, normally in a glider we have:

Power +

Power –

PTT +

PTT –

Microphone +

Microphone –

Speaker +

Speaker –

Other functions are available!
All these functions come as a bundle of wires in a loom from the plug. At least one pair of
wires usually comes off the panel – the PTT wires. Some gliders have the PTT switch on the
panel. A goose neck microphone will require a pair of wires, preferably a shielded pair and if
a 2-seat glider is involved there will be 2 sets of wires, one for each cockpit. A panel mounted
microphone or speaker will not have wires leaving the panel and makes the job easier to wire
up. In the case of a 2-seat glider the speaker is best positioned in the rear instrument panel
coaming so that both pilots can hear it. Rather than having the speaker permanently attached

--- PAGE 68 ---
63
with wires to the airframe fit a small jack plug and socket for easy removal. The radio wiring
loom is best connected directly to a terminal block and associated wires connected to that.
Use a two or three pin plug/socket arrangement to bring power to the panel and a separate
plug/socket to deal with the transceiver wiring utilising a system with enough pins to do the
job. PTT wiring if being connected to the control column should be tywrapped to the control
column and enter the tube through a rubber grommet to prevent fraying and shorting out
leading to a permanent transmit situation. Prior to being tied to the control column it is
necessary to have a loose coil or two to allow full and free movement of the control column
without straining the wires. One pair of wires from the panel will serve both front and rear
cockpits in a 2-seater. (Wire in parallel not series).
If at all possible keep power cables on one side of the cockpit and transceiver wiring on the
other to avoid interference.
With the transceiver installed in the prescribed manner should it need to be removed all that
is necessary to do is to remove the aerial lead and multi pin plug, undo the 4 screws holding it
to the panel and it is out! Word of warning, only use the screws supplied with the transceiver
to secure it to the instrument panel, using longer screws can physically damage internal
components.
Annual checks on the 8.33 transceivers are only required to ensure it is functioning. All
modern 8.33 transceivers have Installation Manuals and User Manuals, therein there is
probably a statement saying:
This VHF Com Transceiver has been designed and manufactured to allow “on condition
maintenance”. This means that there are no periodic service requirements necessary to maintain
continued airworthiness, and no maintenance is required as long as it does properly perform its
intended function.
Frequency checks are therefore not required although you may check if you wish. If there is
something defective and you cannot find the cause and rectify it try borrowing another
transceiver and see how that performs. If it works then the glider wiring is OK and the
transceiver defective. If the borrowed set has the same fault then the wiring is at fault. If you
cannot ascertain the fault – call in an expert!
Section 2
Transponders (XPDR)
AMP Leaflet 1-7 – Transponders
EASA SIB 2011-15R2
Transponders require little or no maintenance other than checking the wiring as per a
transceiver. It is recommended that an annual flight test is performed in conjunction with
ATC who can confirm reception of your signals and in particular the altitude given.
A Transponder needs an aerial and a power supply plus a static pressure feed for altitude
information. Installation of a transponder is not a very difficult task. Most glider
manufacturers now issue a Tech Note saying how and where a transponder aerial is to be
fitted. There is a setting up process to go through to insert the glider’s details and some height
information data. That maybe more arduous than the physical installation!

--- PAGE 69 ---
64
Some transponders can be in two parts – the ‘black box’ and a control box to fit to the
instrument panel thus saving some panel space. The black box can be mounted in a
convenient place off the panel.
A power supply should be provided via a suitably rated circuit breaker or fuse. Details will be
found in the Transponders Manual.
If there are issues call in an expert.
Section 3
Navigation Equipment
Navigation Aids (GPS) come in many different guises from custom made built in glass
screens to a small tablet or phone. Most will need a software download and annual updates to
keep it current. There are now many different navigation programmes available, some
dedicated to gliding with turning points built in to others that are just, but very good,
navigation aids. Sky Demon is reckoned to be the best Nav Aid, you can programme a flight
and it gives you all the necessary NOTAMS and shows controlled airspace. Most glider
programmes leave you to find the NOTAMS.
Once again, other than updating software on an annual basis there is not much to do other
than checking it works and the wiring is serviceable.
Section 4
FLARM
FLARM units need an annual software update to keep them working properly. This action
can be added to the SDMP schedule if you want to.
As with the other avionics equipment the wiring needs to be found in a serviceable condition
and to ensure that it is working properly. Flying a circuit with other gliders around should
show a contact.
These days FLARM installations have gone from the simple box with a display panel to
something that has been well integrated with other instruments and displays that are similar to
radar screens. The equipment manuals are quite comprehensive and deal with wiring the
power supply, settings and updating information. Most displays and primary ‘boxes’ are
linked with specific cables supplied with the unit. All that is required is a power supply and
the aerial fixed in a suitable location.
As an addition to glider conspicuity it is now possible to fit forward facing LED strobe type
lights in the canopy. These lights are linked to the FLARM and flash rapidly towards
oncoming traffic. It helps to be seen!

--- PAGE 70 ---
65
Section 5
General Avionic Things:
As a general rule aerials serving different functions should not be close together. Aerials can
be ¼ Wave aerials or Dipole aerials. ¼ Wave aerials require a ground plane of a particular
dimension and this normally takes the form of a metallic disc or poor man’s aluminium foil.
A Dipole Aerial has the power input in the middle of the vertical aerial, an isolated upper part
comprises a single rod or tube connected to the core of the coax cable and the bottom half,
also a rod or tube is equal in length to the top part and is connected to earth via the coax
shielding. The lengths of the two parts must be of a certain length for the aerial to be
efficient. Efficiency is checked with a Standing Wave Ratio meter (SWR Meter). A simple
Dipole Aerial can be made by stripping the outer shield from the coax cable over a given
length and mount the core vertically upwards and the shield downwards. This does need a
solid surface to support such an aerial – a Fin for example! A number of FLARM aerials are
Dipoles!
Aerials, particularly FLARM aerials should not be obscured by metal components in the
fuselage. FLARM has a low power output and a control rod or rudder pedals can block the
transmitted signal. Transceivers are not quite so affected as their power output is much
greater.
Components attached to jettisonable canopies are NOT a good idea. A wire could prevent
jettison just when you need to abandon ship in an instance! If you come across something
attached to the canopy get it moved to the fuselage or make 100% sure that it can be
jettisoned easily with a simple parting plug or tube. Regrettably the Puchacz canopy holds the
rear cockpit instrument panel and there are pneumatic tubes and all the electrics to disconnect
on jettison! Everything would seem to work on the ground and hopefully it will all part
company when required to do so. If something is hard wired to a canopy (usually by the
owner) then remove it despite protestations and/or suggest a way in which the device can stay
attached but can be easily disconnected as the canopy is jettisoned.
Likewise the top of an instrument panel should not contain all sorts of kit that could catch a
canopy when it is being jettisoned. This is covered by a BGA Inspection referring to Top
Mounted Instruments.

--- PAGE 71 ---
66