# Chapter 7

Cabin Equipment
Cabin Equipment covers just about everything else in and around the cockpit from seat
harness to instruments and oxygen systems to undercarriages.
Section 1
Pilot Restraint Harnesses
AMP Leaflet 1-5
Pilot Restrain Harnesses or seat harnesses are designed to keep the pilot firmly in his/her seat
at all times and in all attitudes. All are fitted with a quick release system that allows the
harness to open quickly and easily. The release mechanism is usually a twist to unlock
function or a lift latch system as found in your favourite airliner. Some older harnesses have a
metal tongue that fits through a loop holding all 4 straps together and has to be pulled
sideways to separate the straps. Some other locking methods are seen such as in Autoflug
Harnesses. Note that Lift Latch systems require the lifting flap to be lifted at least 90 degrees
before the lug is released from the locking latch. Older American systems can unlock at 30
degrees.
Webbing has a life of 12 years but in the UK using the SDMP we can extend the life year by
year providing a good inspection finds the webbing and hardware serviceable. Hardware is
mentioned because if it starts to corrode it can wear into the webbing. The AMP Leaflet gives
clear detail what damage to look for that will cause a harness to become unserviceable. One
defect that most folks don’t appreciate is UV damage. The AMP Leaflet gives examples of
strength degradation over a period due to UV damage. UV – daylight and worse when the sun
shines – degrades the webbing fibres reducing the strength available when required in an
accident. As the AMP outlines, crash worthiness of gliders is being improved all the time and
harnesses are not always keeping up with the demands. A good indicator of UV Damage is a
fading of the webbing colour, the more faded the colour the weaker the webbing. So if on
inspection you find, particularly on shoulder straps, a faded colour on the top of the strap
compared with the colour on the underside it is time to replace the harness or the webbing.
Some black straps can be seen to be grey on top and black beneath, almost rotten webbing.
Section 2
Oxygen Systems
AC 43.13-1B Para 9-47
Old AMP Leaflet 4-11
Oxygen systems preserve life above 10,000 feet and without it judgement becomes impaired
and that can of course lead to serious consequences. Oxygen systems need to be taken care
of.
Oxygen, as we all know, supports combustion. Pure oxygen not only supports vigorous
combustion but can also start spontaneous combustion or even an explosion. Whatever else
you do with oxygen please treat it and systems that carry it with respect.

--- PAGE 72 ---
67
With oxygen systems there are probably more ‘Don’ts’ than there are ‘Do’s’. Even breathing
pure oxygen can be bad for your health! OK, a few deep breaths might cure a morning
hangover but excessive use is not good for the system.
High pressure oxygen in contact with grease or other carbon based residues can cause an
explosion so do not use grease unless it has been designed for use with oxygen, do not wash
components in detergent and let it dry, rinse the detergent off well with clean water. Do not
smoke – the cigarette will burn not smoulder. Clothes you were wearing whilst in an oxygen
rich environment will be a fire risk as the fabric will ignite and burn very readily.
Gaseous oxygen systems have the oxygen stored under high pressure in cylinders and the
cylinders are required to be tested every 5 years. The cylinder itself is tested in a hydrostatic
fashion, in other words filled with water and pressurised in a water tank. Should the cylinder
fail it will split rather than explode as water is almost incompressible. The threads securing
the valve in the neck of the cylinder are also checked.
Bulk oxygen is stored at a higher pressure than your cylinder, when charging from bulk
storage two important things have to be observed: charge the cylinder slowly – it will get
excessively hot if charged too quickly, and then do not over pressurise the cylinder – they will
distort and will explode. Other things come to mind too, ensure the charging valve and the
hose connection are clean before connecting to the bottle. Only use Aviation grade oxygen, it
is all O2 but commercial O2 can have a higher moisture content than Aviation grade.
Moisture freezes when it gets cold at zero degrees and you are needing oxygen where the
temperature can drop to minus 50 degrees. Your regulator can freeze up and leave you with
no oxygen to breath.
Read and digest the contents of the referenced leaflets.
Section 3
Canopies, Care and Maintenance
AC 43.13-1B, Section 3
CS-Stan, Standard Repair CS-SR803a
Canopies keep out the draft and should give you good vision. However, canopies are too
often mistreated and occasionally when looking towards the sun you cannot see out because
of micro scratches in the Perspex where people have tried to rub off a bit of dirt or
condensation with a dry or coarse cloth – and scratched it.
Fine scratches in canopies can be removed by polishing with proprietary brands of
specialised polish. The reference suggests chalk and turpentine mix, never tried that but
French Chalk is a fine powder. The important thing is to use a soft clean cloth for any
polishing operation. Deeper scratches can be removed using Micromesh Cloth Abrasives but
the result, although free of scratches, may well have some optical distortion due to the
thickness change in the canopy.
Cleaning canopies should involve lots of water and wiping with a soft clean cloth – not a big
sponge from the bottom of a bucket that has just been used to clean mud off the fuselage!
DV Windows get punished by folks reaching through to unlock canopies whilst wearing thick
sleeved jackets in winter, what could possibly go wrong! Then someone lifts the canopy open

--- PAGE 73 ---
68
by lifting the top edge of the opening. Please try and educate the culprits. Canopies, Window
Rails, DV Windows and especially the DV Window Fresh Air Scoops are incredibly
expensive (Scoops are around £450 each!)!
CS Stan Leaflet SR308a gives limits to cracks in a canopy both in numbers and lengths of
cracks. Stop drilling cracks is a fine art, the crack end needs to be drilled and that is not
always easy to find. Cracks tend to pass through the Perspex at an angle and thus may be a
little longer than it looks. There is debate as to whether one should obey the conventional
thought of a 1/8” hole or go smaller. A rigging accident put a half inch long crack right in the
front of an IS29D canopy years ago during an Inter Services Comp. An 1/8th drill was called
for but a long-in-the-tooth crew man (a Flight Sergeant) said NO, use a 1/64” drill. The case
was argued that it would be a stress raiser, he argued his case and a 1/64th drill was sourced
from a local hardware shop, the crack end drilled and regarded as serviceable. The glider was
sold 12 years later, no change in the crack and then the new owner met a hill destroying the
glider and the crack had still not grown!
Drills for use in Perspex are another matter for thought. Normal ground drill bits are not
considered suitable as they bite into the material being drilled; LAS sell much more pointed
drills for the job whilst the AC43 reference recommends a much blunter drill bit. I guess you
pays your money and feel happy!
However, a really important thing to note when working with Perspex, drilling or cutting, is
to take it easy and use high speed tooling. Hacksaw blades will suddenly jam and twist and
crack the Perspex. Use a high speed 2” diamond tipped wheel (or similar) for cutting and
drum sanders or diamond burrs for shaping and finishing apertures. Perspex is really quite
flexible and only cracks when given a shock like a hacksaw blade twisting whilst you are
trying to cut the stuff or a drill jamming because it is not the correct type and is trying to cut
its way through rather than shallow scraping. If you are attaching something such as a
compass to an SF25C canopy bubble don’t use a countersunk screw, use something flat and
perhaps a rubber washer adjacent to the Perspex. The same goes for attaching a canopy
bubble to a frame with screws and adhesive. First attach the bubble using flat head screws,
once the adhesive has cured, remove the retaining screws, (which of course you greased prior
to putting in the adhesive), countersink the holes and then put in the countersunk screws and
do not tighten them, just nip up. The countersink shape produces side loads and that can
cause cracks from the hole. The same applies when replacing DV Window rails, screw in the
screw until it stops, no tightening required!
Section 4
Pitot and Static Systems and Flight Instruments
AC-43.13-1B, Chap 12 Sect 4
Section 4.1
Description of Pitot and Static Systems
Ignoring electrical instruments, glider instrument pneumatic systems generally comprise:

Pitot Head and associated tubing

Static Ports and associated tubing

Total Energy Brunswick Tube and associated tubing

Capacity Flasks and associated tubing

--- PAGE 74 ---
69
Pitot heads come in various forms from Pot Pitots, modified Pot Pitots within a nose
combined with a tow release unit to a fin mounted tube or a sophisticated three in one
‘Brunswick’ tube collecting pitot, static and total energy pressures.
Static ports are found on fuselage sides near the nose and often also along the rear fuselage or
in the sophisticated fin mounted probe.
Pitot Pressure is the ram air pressure developed by virtue of the forward movement of the
glider. Pressure increases with speed.
Static Pressure is the pressure of still air surrounding the glider. Pressure decreases with
altitude.
Total Energy Pressure is equal and opposite to Pitot Pressure. This is achieved by sensing the
pressure on the aft side of a tube, the Brunswick Tube. At constant speed the front of the tube
is subjected to ram air and this is Pitot Pressure. Ahead of the tube the air is at static pressure
and aft of the tube the air is still at static pressure. All is in equilibrium and for that to happen
the pressure on the aft face of the Brunswick Tube must be equal and opposite to that
pressure on the front face. The actual pressures are of course all relative to Static Pressure and
speed through the air.
Capacity Flasks are there to operate ‘windy’ variometers. In operation the air within the flask
is forced to expand with increase of height (lower static pressure) and to expand or indeed
contract in volume the air escapes or returns via the variometer.
Instruments then work on 3 different air pressures:

Air Speed Indicators on Pitot Pressure and Static Pressure

Altimeters on Static Pressure

Variometers on Static or Total Energy pressure and Capacity Flasks
Section 4.2
Operation of Mechanical Instruments
The Air Speed Indicator works on the relationship between pitot and static pressure. The
instrument body is sealed and is fed static pressure whilst the pitot pressure is fed to a fine
bellows unit. As pitot pressure increases the bellows unit inflates and being secured on one
side expands towards the other and in the process moves a series of gears and levers against a
spring. The spring is not linear in force because the pressure rises as a square of the speed.
A Photo of the Internal Parts of a Winter ASI and a Schematic of the Mechanism

--- PAGE 75 ---
70
The Altimeter works in a similar way in that it too has a bellows unit. In this case an aneroid
capsule – one containing a vacuum. The capsule itself is also a spring in that it wants to
expand but air pressure keeps it closed. As the altimeter is raised aloft, static pressure drops
and the capsule is allowed to expand. The capsule is then driving a chain of gears and the face
of the imperial instrument shows the pilot the height in feet.
A View of the Internal Parts of a Winter Altimeter
The Variometer is a flow meter and measures the air flow out of or into the capacity flask and
presents the result to the pilot on the face of the instrument in knots or metres per second up
or down. Early Cosim Variometers had a red and green ball one in each of two tubes. The
green was indicating up and the red was down. The tubes had a small groove cut in the rear
part and this was tapered allowing an escape of air, the further up the tube the greater the rate
of climb and the larger the tapered slot. Modern Winter type variometers are of the Vane
Type. A Vane attached to the needle is in a chamber that gets slightly larger the higher the rate
of climb or sink. The majority of variometers require a capacity flask of 0.45 litres. The more
sensitive variometers require a 0.9 litre flask. Some instruments are linear on the face and
some non-linear so that the space between 0 and 2 Knots is greater than the space between 8
and 10 knots. This allows a more accurate reading of weak lift rates. The larger the capacity
the more sensitive the instrument – greater air flow for given rate of climb.
An Internal View of a Winter Variometer
Oriﬁce 
to Sta c

--- PAGE 76 ---
71
The sketch below from the K21 Maintenance Manual shows the basic system in a K21 but
omits the Altimeter in the Static System. Note too that there is a colour code for the different
tubes.

Pitot is Green

Static is Clear

Total Energy is Red

Capacity Bottle Tubes are Blue
Connection of the pneumatic instrument tubes to the instrument panels is often through a
multi-way pneumatic plug/socket. This make instrument panel removal a lot easier than
disconnecting numerous pipes from the instruments.
The K21 drawing above shows the two variometers connected to the Total Energy System.
Total Energy gives you a reading of what the aircraft is doing in relation to the rate of climb
regardless of changes of speed. We all know that if you fly fast and pull the stick back the
glider climbs, we know that and do not need an instrument to tell us. We would rather know
our rate of climb without ‘stick lift’. An instrument connected to Static will show a rate of
climb when the stick is pulled back and the glider climbs, the air speed also decays. Now
connect the instrument to a Total Energy source and when the glider climbs with stick lift the
‘static’ pressure (now equal and opposite to Pitot Pressure) is balanced between a reduction in
true static pressure with height gain and an increase in total energy pressure as airspeed is
reduced. Thus the need for air to depart the flask is reduced and so the rate of climb reading
in theory should show the rate of climb induced by the thermal. If you watch a vario on Total
Energy at the point of launch you will see it show a rate of climb yet you are accelerating
horizontally not climbing. The Total Energy pressure is reducing due to being equal and
opposite to Pitot Pressure (which is rising) and so air is forced out of the flask but it soon
sorts itself out.

--- PAGE 77 ---
72
Electronic Variometers and other instruments are now quite sophisticated devices and like
lots of instruments getting smaller and more expensive! Probably the smallest vario with
audio is the Tasman Variometer – a small cube behind the panel. It, like others, just requires a
Total Energy source connection. Multi-function instruments may also need Pitot and Static
connections made. Some gliders still fly with no static connection being made to the
instruments but rely on ‘Cockpit Static’. This is OK but cockpit static pressure changes if you
open or close DV windows or side-slip thus making the instruments less accurate.
Section 4.3
ASI and Altimeter Checks and Water Manometer Design
Every Annual Servicing the Air Speed Indicator and Altimeter need to be checked for
accuracy. In the BGA we check the ASI against a water manometer. These are usually hand-
made pieces of equipment and assuming the calibration scale is marked accurately and filled
with water the device should be pretty accurate. Because we do not calibrate our manometers
we are only allowed to refer to the annual check as ‘An Operational Check’ not a Calibration.
Reading Manometer – ASI should be within ±2 Knots. A table of results should be drawn up
so that results can be recorded and discrepancies calculated. The ASI needs to be checked
with both rising and falling airspeeds up to the Vne of the glider plus 10 or 20 Knots. A
sketch of a simple Manometer and calibration figures are shown below:

--- PAGE 78 ---
73
Calibration Figures for a Water Manometer
Measured in Inches and mm for Knots and PSI
Height of Water
Column
Knots
Inches
mm
PSI
0
0
0
0
10
0.018
0.457
0.003
20
0.258
6.561
0.010
30
0.585
14.849
0.021
40
1.047
26.591
0.038
50
1.632
41.440
0.059
60
2.352
59.743
0.085
70
3.159
80.239
0.115
80
4.174
106.020
0.151
90
5.302
134.681
0.192
100
6.540
166.108
0.236
110
7.927
201.333
0.286
120
9.449
240.010
0.341
130
11.108
282.141
0.401
140
12.903
327.726
0.466
150
14.833
376.763
0.536
160
16.900
429.255
0.611
170
19.116
485.544
0.691
180
21.482
545.633
0.776
190
23.983
609.176
0.866
200
26.635
676.516
0.962
Important Note: When making up a scale for a U-
Tube Manometer the scale has to divided in two
because the height is between the two water levels
and not the height from where the zero level was.
All that is required to make a manometer is a base, vertical board, acrylic or glass tube,
silicon tube, Tee Pieces, a filter, 20 cc syringe, a needle valve, an adjustable knots scale plate
and hardware to hold everything in place.
An example of an ASI Operational Check is here:

--- PAGE 79 ---
74
Altimeters are also required to be checked for accuracy on an annual basis. There are several
ways of checking the accuracy of the millibar scale:

Check Altimeter against three or four other instruments – crude but reasonably
effective, not ideal

Check against a Master Altimeter that is calibrated on a regular basis

Check against a Vernier type mercury barometer

Check against a reading given by your local ATC with an adjustment for height
difference of locations and if the weather pressure pattern permits
These checks of the ASI and Altimeter can be carried out insitu. I suggest that these checks
are one of the first things to be carried out during an Annual Inspection so that instruments, if
defective, can be sent for repair and maybe back before the inspection is complete.
Section 4.4
Testing the Systems
The pitot system should be checked for leaks and this is best done by connecting the
Manometer to the pitot head applying pressure say to 100 knots and ensure that the pressure
is held. If there is a leak the system has to be broken down into sections and each part tested.
A very minor leak can be tolerated as Pitot Pressure is always being created but larger leaks
will cause the ASI to show a low reading and that cannot be tolerated as the glider may
exceed VNE.
The static system is more difficult to test as there are usually several static ports. These have
to be blanked off and a pipe from one disconnected so that air may be drawn out of the
system with a large syringe using the altimeter as the pressure gauge. Again the reduced
pressure should be maintained. In practice this may not be a viable check as the static system
reaches right through to the variometer capacity flask(s) giving a big volume of air to be
evacuated. Capacity flasks can of course be disconnected or the silicon pipe blanked or just
clamped off.
A common cause of a leak in the pitot or static systems is mouse chewed pipes. Sometimes
this damage is out of reach of a human and may require major surgery to replace the damaged
pipe. Last Autumn the pitot system on a Venture was checked on the first day of its Annual
Servicing. The first flight following the Annual Inspection was carried out with no ASI
reading. The silicon pipe attached to the wing mounted pitot head had been chewed (during
the Annual) and required a hole cut in the lower wing skin to replace a few inches of pipe and
replacement of the RAF Roundel. The mouse had climbed the tail wheel, entered the fuselage
via the rudder cable aperture, walked to the centre section climbed up to an aperture in the
left hand wing and gone for a long walk outboard!
Any flight instrument found defective must be sent away for repair. There is apparently
someone in Scotland who can do the job or alternatively Winter will service almost anything
even if it is not of their manufacture. If an ASI is found to be 5 Knots out (as shown in the
above check) at an airspeed well above the glider’s Vne then that would not necessitate an
immediate repair.
It is useful if you can source a spare ASI and Altimeter for loan whilst instrument repairs are
carried out. That saves a lot of down-time on a glider.

--- PAGE 80 ---
75
Note also that ASIs are to have coloured markings as per the Flight Manual; in the case of the
K21 the Accelerometer is also required to have markings applied to the face of the
instrument.
Section 5
Approved Equipment
AMP 1-XX Parts and Materials
The AMP Leaflet gives guidance on parts and materials that are Approved or Non-Certified
and how to record such components used to service our gliders.
Equipment installed in gliders must be Approved Equipment. Approved Equipment such as a
Transceiver or Transponder must be of an approved type by EASA or the CAA. The manual
for these specific items will have the approval number within and the item will have been
delivered with a Form 1.
Glider manufacturers give a list of Minimum Equipment covering instruments, seat
harnesses, tow release units and so on and occasionally a list of approved equipment.
Additional equipment can be added if it has been approved by a regularity body under
possibly a manufacturer’s specific Tech Note (for a transponder and aerial for example), a
more general Tech Note for installing additional equipment or using the authority of CS-Stan
(latest edition).
Standard parts may be used but need the Owner’s authority to fit them. Items such as wheel
bearings, nuts and bolts and so on can be purchased from commercial sources but must be of
OEM quality – not cheap imitations. Some suppliers of standard parts will also issue a C of C
if requested.
With nuts and bolts take care. If you are replacing a standard commercial metric nut or bolt
with an 8.8 or higher strength rating that is acceptable. However, aircraft specification metric
nuts and bolts fall under the LN series of hardware. Do not replace LN hardware with
commercial parts, get a new LN part. There will have been a design reason for that part.
Section 6
Compasses and Swinging
AC 43.13-1B, Section 3 Para 12-37
Compasses are probably the most ignored instrument in the glider. For years compasses have
been seen as unreliable because they rarely indicate a correct heading. This is primarily due
to the complete lack of compass swinging knowledge or facilities.
However, swinging a compass is not all that difficult. You require an accurate ‘Landing
Compass’ (an accurate and calibrated compass) to assess the heading of the glider and a non-
ferrous key or screwdriver to adjust the compass. Some compasses have a triangular headed
adjuster whilst others just a plain screwdriver slot.
The AC 43 reference tells how to carry out a compass swing and assumes that a Compass
Rose is marked out on the ground!

--- PAGE 81 ---
76
A compass should be mounted a reasonable distance from ferrous metal structure and
electronic instruments, speakers and electric motors as in Turn and Slip indicators. If panel
mounted try and avoid places where control movements may have an effect. ASW20s have a
flap lever on the left side of the cockpit, if the compass is on the left putting the flap lever
into full negative will move the compass by about 30 degrees! The compass fore/aft axis
must be parallel to the gliders centreline to enable an accurate reading to be taken.
Section 7
Tow Release Units
Tow Release Units are available from two companies, Tost and Ottfur. The vast majority of
gliders are fitted with Tost units whilst some have modern Ottfur units that are compatible
with the mounting used by the Tost Units. Early British gliders were fitted with Ottfur
Release Units which were mounted on a bulkhead rather than between shear webs or in a
box.
Tost Release units are either Aerotow units or Centre of Gravity units, the finer points of
design are occasionally updated. There are some special units for particular gliders but have
the same functionality. The life of the Tost Release Units is 4 years or 2000 launches. The 4
years can be dispensed with by a Deviation in the glider’s SDMP leaving the 2000 launches
which cannot be extended. The release units are deemed to be non-repairable at user level
meaning that they have to be returned to Tost for overhaul. Tost will overhaul your unit or
provide an exchange unit. Some glider repair organisations keep a small stock of releases for
immediate dispatch without the need to contact Tost. (Anglia Sailplanes does).
Ottfur units, Aerotow or CG units, do not have a specified life but a recommended overhaul
at 5000 launches. They can be stripped, serviced and reassembled at user level and the lever
spring is changed at that time. Spare parts are available from Roger Andrews who is
responsible for Ottfur Release Units. The modern Ottfur Release Units are often found in
K13 and K21 gliders.
Tost and Ottfur Release Units are both much the same internally and operate in the same way.
To prevent the hook from being pulled open by the tow cable the mechanism has an over-
centre lock and the strength of this is controlled by the adjusting screw and lock nut seen on
the upper forward part of the unit. If the over-centre lock is not made or is far too weak then
the tow cable will open the hook; if the over-centre lock is too strong then the pilot will find
the load on the release knob excessively high. The adjustment is NOT a user task! It is all set
up in a bench rig.
The picture below shows the internal mechanism of an Ottfur Aerotow Release Unit, apart
from the lever the Tost unit is virtually identical. This picture shows the unit in the Open
position. The over-centre lock is made in the Closed position – that is with the Operating
Lever rotated anti-clockwise until the Link Pin 1 is above the straight line made by the Lever
Pivot and Link Pin 2. The Hook at that point will have rotated clockwise to the Closed
position. The Adjusting Screw rests on the link adjacent to the top of the Link Pin 1.
Operating the release unit pulls the lever upwards and breaks the over-centre lock by forcing
Link Pin 1 downwards between the Lever Pivot and Link Pin 2 whilst these two pivot points
are being pressed together by the towing load on the hook. (The Lever Spring has been
omitted but holds the Operating Lever in the Closed position – rotated anti-clockwise).

--- PAGE 82 ---
77
Ottfur Aerotow Release Unit
The CG Release Units are identical in operation but the hook is located inside the Back
Release Bell unit. The Bell is held forward by a strong spring and is moved aft as the winch
cable angle moves further down and aft allowing the rings slide off the tail of the Hook and
‘Back Release’.
The launch life of either type or brand is calculated on glider launches and not on the number
of times a particular unit has been used to launch the glider. If a club is a winch only club and
never launches a glider using the aerotow unit the aerotow unit is still life-ex at 2000
Launches – it has been operated for 2000 launches. A record must be kept for each release
unit by serial number to record date and launches when fitted and the date/launches when it
must be replaced or in the case of Ottfur Units – serviced.
The use of Tost Release Rings in Ottfur Release Units is quite acceptable whereas Ottfur
rings are not to be used in Tost Units or modern Ottfur units.
Release system cables are generally 3/32” Cable and will have a turnbuckle in the system for
adjustment, this is more commonly found in the CG release cable to allow adjustment
ensuring both release units open simultaneously. Adjustment then is pull the release handle
and check both units are fully open (can you move the operating lever further in the direction
of travel?). If one unit is fully open and the other is not then the cable to the CG Unit has to
be adjusted. If the CG unit is not fully open the cable needs shortening; if the aerotow unit is
not fully open then the cable to the CG unit needs lengthening.
When the release cable system is at rest there must be 10mm slack between the release knob
and the point where the cable disappears into a conduit or fairlead. This slack in the system
ensures that a release unit is not held partially open which could lead to a launch failure
through premature cable release.
Please take the inspection and servicing of release units at an annual inspection seriously
rather than have an ‘It’s OK’ attitude. It is most galling to be called to check a release unit on

--- PAGE 83 ---
78
a glider that is only a week or two out of an annual servicing to find that both legs of the lever
spring are broken and the covered box that houses the other release unit is still stuffed with
dry grass. One leg of the spring must have been broken at the annual inspection and the other
unit was certainly not looked at! Just because a release unit has not reached 2000 launches
does not mean it is going to be serviceable. The most common defect is a broken lever spring,
they have two legs, check that they are both intact!
Release units are relatively easy to remove and refit. If a unit is dirty it can be cleaned either
with a blast of compressed air or be removed, blown through and then put in an ultrasonic
bath for better cleaning. Make sure it is properly dry and lubricated prior to refitting it.
Removal of a unit is achieved by disconnecting the operating cable and then removing the
two or three bolts holding it in place. With CG Release Units it is possible to alter the
relationship between mounting structure and the unit, check which bolt holes are used in the
installation before removal and make a note. (The three holes at the lower front of the unit are
on a common radius to the lower rear mounting hole). Check the retaining bolts for
serviceability and replace if defective, commonly rust or occasionally ‘waisting’ where the
unit may have moved marking the shank of the bolt; both defects are a cause for rejection.
Replacement is in reverse. Ensure that the plain shank of each retaining bolt passes
completely through the shear webs or box structure so that the threads are not in shear. Use
new stiff nuts if necessary. Once all is connected ensure that the system operates correctly.
Note that the K21 crossed cable arrangement just ahead of the front control column looks
wrong – it isn’t, do not uncross the cable, it will not work.
Release operating cables are not generally lifed items, just inspected annually. However, the
K21 Life Extension Programme does put a life on the release cables. That is the only place
where the cable life is mentioned.
Section 8
Water Ballast Systems
There are different designs of water ballast systems, some have integral tanks, others bag
tanks and some gliders have fin tanks as well.
Water ballast is carried to make the glider heavier. This has one advantage and a
disadvantage. By a fluke of aerodynamics a glider can fly faster down the same glide slope
(angle) when heavy as opposed to being lighter. The disadvantage is that it needs a stronger
thermal to lift its increased weight. That is why when weak lift is forecast no-one carries
water. It is all a balancing act between thermal strengths and glider weight.
There is not a lot to service on a water ballast system. The tanks need checking periodically,
this can be done by filling the tank and have a tube raised higher than the wing. The water
level in the tube should not get lower over time. If it does then there is a leak.
Bag tanks can be removed fairly easily. Usually a panel has to be removed from the root rib
to enlarge the opening through which the bag will be extracted. There will be a cord that goes
around a pulley at the end of the bag’s installed position – do not lose that as it pulls the bag
back into the wing. Extend the length of it if necessary.

--- PAGE 84 ---
79
The water dump system needs to be inspected and in good working order. Wing dump valves
must open together to prevent asymmetric loading risking an uncontrollable roll action
towards the heavy wing. Likewise the fin dump valve must also be fully serviceable. Fin
dump valves are usually housed in a metal frame which of course tends to corrode. The best
answer here is to remove the dump valve and then the housing frame, often the lower rudder
hinge as well. Clean the frame of surface rust by bead blasting and then have the component
zinc plated. If the corrosion is too bad then a new housing frame will need to be purchased
from the manufacturer.
Seal kits are available from the manufacturer to service a suspect dump valve. Plate valves
inside a dump valve may not seal if fully tightened onto a stem. A little play is sometimes a
good thing!
Check that the operating cables are serviceable, not frayed or corroded particularly adjacent
to the fin dump valve. Ensure that the cable retaining ends are secure, most are held by a
screwed fitting. Is the screw tight?
On the Astir there is an AD to check security of the fuselage connection to the wing water
ballast system on an annual basis. If not secure it is to be repaired. (The fittings are bonded to
the inside of the skin).
Section 9
Undercarriage Systems
Fixed undercarriages are not usually a major issue as they have very little movement.
However, they still need inspecting and lubricating. The K21 wheel needs to be removed and
the bearings serviced as mentioned in an earlier session. The undercarriage structure is
mounted on two bolts that provide a pivot action allowing the undercarriage to be cushioned
on landing by the rubber donuts mounted on each side in the centre section. There are grease
nipples on the bolts to lubricate the joint. It may pay occasionally to remove the bolts for
inspection and lubrication of both bearing surfaces. Much the same applies to other fixed but
sprung undercarriages. Wheels should always be removed annually to check the wheel
bearings, brake linings and also inspection of the axle bolt – they get bent and are difficult to
remove in that fashion, turns a tyre change mid-season into a nightmare. Not everyone reports
the fact that they have had a heavy landing!
Retractable undercarriages are another kettle of fish. By their nature they retract, usually
when the pilot pulls or pushes the correct lever. However, sod’s law says, and does, retract
undercarriages in an undemanded fashion just as the glider puts weight on it. Alternatively
there are those folks who do not retract the undercarriage after launch, fly around a task and
then retract the undercarriage before landing! Not a lot an inspector can do about that except
ensure the cockpit placards are correctly fitted.
Retractable undercarriages are held in the down position by an over-centre lock. The over-
centre lock is invariably in the rear strut of the undercarriage as that is the bit that folds on
retraction. The over-centre is caused by two fixed points at the end of a folding strut and the
mid-point pivot is offset to one side of the straight line joining the other two points with a
hard stop to prevent the over-centre going too far over. Some over-centre locks are adjustable
at the lock by an adjustable bolt, others rely on an adjustment remote from the joint.

--- PAGE 85 ---
80
The undercarriage lever is not designed to support the weight of the glider, that is the
responsibility of the undercarriage and the afore mentioned over-centre lock. If the over-
centre lock is not properly made when the undercarriage is down the slackness in the system
can allow the lock to fail and the undercarriage to retract when subjected to the landing load.
Apart from then damaging the undercarriage doors there is damage to the underside of the
fuselage and also to the undercarriage operating system because that has been overloaded. A
simple check, weight off the undercarriage is to see if you can insert a piece of paper into the
stop at the knuckle joint – both sides of the undercarriage, it should also resist upward
pressure. If you can it needs adjusting.
Astir Undercarriage Knuckle Joint – Should Resist Upward Pressure
The Over-Centre lock sketched above relies on the Torque Bar holding the abutting faces of
the two links together. The Torque Bar is held in position by the cockpit undercarriage lever
in its detent. The lever should be a positive push into the detent to ensure that there is some
pressure applied to the Torque Bar and the over-centre linkage. The load on the axle is
transmitted in a straight line to the Torque Bar but via the two links. The load is forcing the
two links downwards but they cannot move because of the abutting faces and the off-set pin.
With weight off the wheel the knuckle should resist upwards pressure. If the knuckle can be
moved then the system needs adjusting to ensure that the whole joint is held ‘down’.
Slackness in the system can lead to the links being flicked upwards on landing and if the
weight then comes onto the wheel whilst the links are out of position then the load will cause
the left hand (rear) link to be forced anticlockwise and put all the load into the retraction
system which is not designed to take it. Something breaks!
Servicing the undercarriage requires a certain amount of dismantling of the undercarriage
itself. Most joints in the undercarriage are pin or bolts through plain bushes and no real
means of lubricating them. The only thing to do – having removed the wheel - is to remove
the pins or bolts and then the bushes. Clean and grease them. Ensure the retaining hardware is
refitted the same way round as it was when you removed it, if you don’t then something
might jam on retraction. Note that the bushes are slightly longer that the holes they sit in to
allow freedom of rotation.

--- PAGE 86 ---
81
A number of retracting undercarriages are spring assisted, either by a conventional coil spring
or a gas spring strut. Check that these are serviceable and that the gas strut actually has the
correct pressure in it. one or two gliders have a damper strut in the system. It is a bit difficult
to ascertain the pressure in a gas strut or to even know how strong it should feel. If in real
doubt remove the strut and test it. The force the strut is supposed to contain is on the label (if
that is still there or readable). The strength of the gas strut may be given in the manual, if not
then the glider agent in the UK or the manufacturer should be able to tell you. Using a
weighing scale you can press down on the gas strut and see what the scale reads – you will
have to convert the reading to Newtons from pounds or Kilogrammes. Refit the gas strut or
get a new one. Mount it the correct way round.
Finally carry out a retraction test and ensure that the operating lever in the cockpit goes into
the up and down detents in a satisfactory manner. It should have a positive lock-in feel. The
Up and Down detents are normally fixed items and as the lever is constantly being pushed in
and out of them they wear. The worn part needs replacing occasionally. The easiest way to do
that is to make up a Paxolin or hard nylon plate and secure it under the existing position of
the detent and reprofile it. Most gliders have rigid detents in the seat mounting structure but
Pik gliders have a detent system on a piece of GRP that is screwed to the cockpit side
structure. Constant use lets the retaining M5 screws gradually chew into the GRP plate
allowing it to move aft (Down is in the forward detent) and if this goes unnoticed the end
result is that the over-centre lock is not made and the undercarriage collapses next time it is
loaded ripping the GRP plate out of its mounting.
Section 10
Wheel Brake Systems
Wheel brakes are either drum brakes, Disc brakes or steel plates pulled onto the tyre – or non-
brakes.
Drum Brakes are found in most Tost Wheels, most drums are internal but some are in
external drums. The operation of the wheel brake is quite simple, a cam is turned and opens
one end of the brake shoes. The cam is turned by pulling on an external lever that operates a
shaft through the Brake Housing/Anchor Plate and the integral cam on the other end of the
shaft.
The cam, which is a race track shape, moves both brake shoes simultaneously against the
brake drum lining. The brake shoes pivot on a fitting opposite the cam shaft and are held in
place and retract under the influence of two springs. So that the lever can be pulled the
Anchor Plate is held in position by a locking bolt or stud (part of the brake shoe pivot
mounting) to the undercarriage structure. On some wheel installations this locking stud is a
pain to get into the correct place! Persevere! This locking stud must be a good fit in the hole
to ensure the Anchor Plate is really secure. If it is not secure then on applying the brake the
whole thing can judder quite badly. If this happens a repair is required. Either the stud or hole
is worn. If the stud is worn then a new one can be obtained from Tost or if the hole is worn
then that needs attention. The stud is an internally threaded bush and if you have the tooling
one can be made up oversize to fit the enlarged hole. The enlarged hole is probably oval and
needs reaming out to make it round. The desired repair will take into account the damage and
the material used in the undercarriage construction, steel, aluminium alloy or GRP. If you
need to repair a hole in a GRP section it is recommended to take a leaf out of the Slingsby

--- PAGE 87 ---
82
Vega Manual and use a mixture of resin and Marble Flour. Ream the hole to be repaired a
little oversize, thoroughly degrease it, fill or line with the resin mixture and refit everything
with the stud being well greased to prevent adhesion to the resin.
The operating shaft can wear the hole in which it sits – the shaft is steel and the hole is in
aluminium. Should the hole get excessively worn then there are two choices: repair it – or
buy a new anchor plate. A repair is relatively simple if you have the equipment (a lathe
helps). Drill and ream out the hole about 4mm oversize and make a brass bush to be an
interference fit in the hole. The internal diameter of the bush should be slightly smaller than
the shaft diameter. Once the bush is in position and trimmed back to the surface of the brake
back plate the hole is reamed out to fit the shaft. The bush MUST be a good interference fit in
the aluminium plate so that it does not turn.
The operating shaft benefits from being removed, cleaned and regreased occasionally. Quite
often when removed the shaft is found dry and with some minor rust issues. The cam also
needs a very small amount of grease on its face so that it can slide easily on the face of the
brake shoe. Be aware that Tost brake shoes are not symmetrical when viewed fore and aft.
There is a blue line on the side of the shoe that faces inboard.
A Tost 5” Drum Brake
The majority of drum brakes are just cable operated from a lever in the cockpit, a bicycle type
brake grip on the control column, a cable from the airbrake lever or system or as in the
Puchacz a ball to pull. The LS gliders use the rudder pedals – push both pedals hard to apply
the brake. However, there are now a number of modifications available to operate drum
brakes via a hydraulic system. Opinions differ on the cost effectiveness of this action,
personally I do not think it is worth the effort. If brakes are adjusted properly I think a good
force on the operating cable by squeezing a bicycle type lever on the control column, pulling
hard on the airbrake or just pulling a ball will stop you just about as quickly – especially if
you do need to stop in a great hurry. (A drop of Adrenalin works wonders on brake
effectiveness)!
Fine adjustment is by a threaded sleeve on the end of a Bowden cable, often one adjuster at
each end if it is a control column mounted grip, a turnbuckle on airbrake operated systems
and on the Puchacz! Coarse adjustment can be made on the brake operating lever as that is
held to the cam shaft on a conical spline, lift the lever off the spline and reposition it. This
spline connection needs to be secure before connecting to the operating cable as there is no
way to turn the operating shaft without the lever being attached. The brake should be adjusted
so that the shoes are almost rubbing on the drum and then very little movement of the brake
lever, airbrake or rudder pedals will immediately apply the brake. Further movement of the
brake lever will increase the force put on the brake shoes and hence the braking force. In the
case of control column mounted levers it is preferable that the lever cannot quite reach the

--- PAGE 88 ---
83
control column when squeezed hard. It is not always possible to satisfy both criteria and a
compromise adjustment has to be found.
Disc brakes are hydraulically operated by their design. The brake disc, on application of the
brake, is squeezed between two brake linings operated by the brake calliper. Hydraulic
pressure is supplied by the Master Cylinder of which there are many variants.
The Master Cylinder is operated by cable or rod from the Air Brake Lever or a control
column grip. A mechanical advantage is achieved by having the input to a lever whose linear
movement is greater than the Master Cylinder’s piston.
The common types of hydraulic disc brakes are Cleveland and Tost. The K21 for example has
a Cleveland Disc Brake and Master Cylinder; The Ventus has its own small Master Cylinder
and a Cleveland disc brake, the Grob 103 Series have a larger version of the Cleveland Disc
Brake to suit its larger wheel. The PW6 has a Tost Master Cylinder and Cleveland Disc
Brake. There are many combinations and modifications to upgrade to hydraulic disc brake
systems. The drawings below show the construction of the Cleveland components used in the
K21:

--- PAGE 89 ---
84
Drawings Courtesy of Cleveland Wheels and Brakes
An application of the brake extends the piston in the brake calliper and that piston does not
retract significantly when the brakes are released. Repetitive brake applications causes the
calliper piston to move out to cater for brake lining wear and thus the volume of hydraulic oil
in the system is increased. That volume has to be filled from the reservoir. Replenishment of
the hydraulic oil in the brake system and cylinder is via the Piston and Valve.

--- PAGE 90 ---
85
Hydraulic oil from the reservoir is available at the Inlet Port and then into the annular space
around the Gland End and through to the Washer Seal. Upon the application of the brake the
Piston Rod moves in (left) squeezing the Washer Seal between the Piston Rod and the Piston
thus sealing off the brake pressure system from the reservoir. Continued movement of the
Piston Rod forces more hydraulic oil into the Brake Calliper and increases the pressure and
applies the brake. When the brake is released and the Piston Rod withdrawn the Piston lags
behind opening the gap around the Washer Seal. Hydraulic oil is allowed to pass between the
Piston Rod, the Washer Seal and the Piston ensuring that the system is full of hydraulic oil
and ready for the next application of the brake.
When bleeding the brake system from the calliper, air and hydraulic oil are allowed to pass
between the Piston and Piston Rod (Piston is not a tight fit on the Piston Rod) and then past
the Washer Seal. From there passage to the reservoir is unhindered. To remove as much air as
possible from the system it is desirable to have the master cylinder vertical.
The brake linings, certainly in the Cleveland Callipers, are rivetted to the back plates, a
special tool is needed to set the rivets properly. The linings have a wear limit as do the brake
discs; these limits are found in manuals, the Tost manual has the Cleveland limits listed. An
element of judgement is required when looking at the wear, if it is a private glider not doing a
lot of flying then the components may well last till the next annual. However, a well-used
training glider will need new brake linings if the current ones are getting close to the limit.
Don’t skimp on a bit of expenditure, if the linings wear out during the year the consequences
will be expensive. The linings are probably never looked at on a DI and the next thing is
either hydraulic oil leaking onto the disc and possibly the tyre (tyres do not like hydraulic oil)
or there will be metal-to-metal contact between the disc and the brake lining rivets and/or
support plates damaging expensive items.
Disc brakes are inherently ‘self-adjusting’ in that they are squeezed onto the disc but there are
no springs to release the brake – just the release of hydraulic pressure. The brake linings on
their mountings retract just enough not to rub hard on the disc and as the linings wear so the
calliper keeps moving them towards the disc. Don’t let the linings wear down to the thickness
of a sheet of paper as the calliper piston can pop too far out with its O-Ring seal and ooze
hydraulic oil over the disc and wheel/tyre assembly.
Hydraulic oil such as the automotive Dot 4 is hygroscopic and absorbs water, this in turn can
lead to corrosion of the metal components in the system. The BGA recommends draining and
replacing the brake fluid on a regular basis, about every 2 - 3 years, add it as a reminder to the
log book or Form 280.
A Tost 5” Drum Braked Wheel and Disc Braked Wheel

--- PAGE 91 ---
86
Disc brake callipers have a habit of getting very dirty and somewhat seized up. This degrades
the brake performance as the brake linings are not being squeezed hard enough onto the disc,
the linings can be caused to rub on the disc and make it hot and corrosion can set in between
the calliper piston and the cylinder. Then the O-ring seal wears rapidly on the corroded
surfaces and the whole thing leaks hydraulic oil. If there are issues around the calliper remove
and strip it down. Sometimes easier said than done.
The bottom side of the calliper has a bleed valve installed and the top side – connection to the
hydraulic system – an American AN Hydraulic fitting. Both items are fitted into tapered
threads. The AN fitting will probably unscrew quite readily but the bleed valve! The part that
is screwed into the calliper is like a hollow sleeve and rarely gets moved and may well shear
off when being removed. If it is not a problem leave it alone. The centre part is the bleeding
bit, that should be relatively free to move as it needs to be unscrewed to bleed the system.
Use a good ring spanner or socket to undo the bleed nipple in the first instance rather than an
open ended spanner to avoid rounding off the hexagon.
When installing new brake linings the calliper piston has to be pushed back into the cylinder
as it has moved out to take up the wear in the old linings. Use a large ‘G’ Cramp for that job,
top of the cramp on the piston, (helps keep it square with the cylinder). Should the piston not
move in with relative ease then that is a sign that there is probably dirt or corrosion present,
neither is good. The piston needs to come out. There are two ways of doing that, there is a
third in sheer desperation! First, you can use the brake system to pump the piston out, ensure
that the calliper is over a suitable container or small drip tray to catch the piston and fluid. If
that does not work – possibly because you have established that the piston refuses to return
into the cylinder – then completely remove the calliper from the glider, again have a
container ready to catch the hydraulic fluid as it flows out of the reservoir.
The next step in removing the piston is to blow it out with compressed air or pressure from a
hydraulic rig. Compressed air is usually more readily available than excessive hydraulic
pressure but is more likely to send the piston flying. Wrap the calliper in a cloth to prevent
the piston from disappearing from view when it comes out. Make sure the bleed valve is
closed and apply air pressure to the AN fitting or that aperture, use a trigger airgun or connect
a hose to the unit. Hopefully the piston will pop out. If it does not, go down the hydraulic
route if possible or, in desperation, mount the whole calliper in a lathe and cut the piston out.
New pistons are available but one can easily be made in a lathe. If the cylinder is lightly
corroded then a good rub round with fine wet/dry paper will do the trick. If the corrosion is
severe with pitting then there are two options, buy a new unit – very expensive – or mount
the calliper body in a lathe and skim out as little metal as possible to clear the corrosion pits,
then make a new piston to fit. A piston 1mm larger diameter will be OK using the same size
O-Ring seal. Always refit a piston with a new seal and lubricate with an appropriate seal
lubricant.
Refilling the hydraulic system or just bleeding the air out of it is best done from the bleed
valve at the bottom of the calliper when installed. Bleeding from the bottom ensures that air
is forced up the system rather than trying to force it down when the air would rather be on top
of the oil not underneath it. If the Master Cylinder is mounted horizontally it will not be
properly bled so if possible remove its mounting bolts and keep it sloping upwards towards
the inlet port during the bleeding process. The Master Cylinder piston should be fully
retracted for oil and air to flow through it back to the reservoir.

--- PAGE 92 ---
87
There are proprietary makes of equipment you can buy to bleed the brake system but a large
syringe and a piece of nylon tube works just as well and is much cheaper. First check that the
bleed valve is free and can be undone and tightened easily. Remove the core and apply a little
grease to help. Attach a piece of nylon tube – not silicon – to the syringe and suck up
hydraulic oil from the supply bottle. Remove air from the syringe and tube and ensure that
the tube is full of oil to the end and push it onto the bleed nipple, unscrew the nipple a turn or
two and push the oil in from the syringe. Have cloth or paper towel beneath to catch the
inevitable spill. Shut the bleed nipple when the syringe is almost empty of oil. Now repeat the
exercise again ensuring that when the nylon tube is attached to the nipple there is no air being
introduced. Repeat this operation until there is some oil in the reservoir. Once you are happy
that all the air has been expelled from the system then shut off the bleed nipple and fill the
reservoir directly to the correct level, no need to continue filling from the bottom. Clean up
all the wet cloths and ensure the brakes, undercarriage and tyre in particular do not have any
hydraulic oil on them and wash your hands thoroughly. Check the brake for correct operation.
The calliper may well need operating through several cycles of brake application before the
brake linings contact the brake disc so do not be alarmed if it does not work on the first
application of brake.
Steel Plate Brakes are found on some of the older Schleicher gliders – Ka6 for example.
These are literally a curved steel plate that sits over the top of the wheel/tyre assembly,
hinged at the back end and cable operated from the front end. When the brake is applied it is
pulled down onto the tyre. Crude type of brake and works when dry – when wet it is not so
good. The problems are that it wears the tyre out and also wears itself out and the steel plate
can get holes in it. The holes have sharp edges and if not sorted out can cut into the tyre
wrecking that. Some installations have a brake lining material attached to the steel plate.
Section 11
Wheels and Tyres
AC 43.13-1B, Chap 9, Landing Gear; Para 9-14, Tyres
CAIP Part 2, Lft AL/3-18 and 19 Tyres, Wheels and Brakes
CAAIP Chap 32, landing Gear including Tyres, Wheels and Brakes
Michelin Tyre Courses Levels 1 and 2
Goodyear Aviation Tyre Care-2020
Wheels and tyres used on gliders and motor gliders are usually of aviation quality, however,
some tail wheel tyres and occasionally nose wheel tyres and their tubes are ‘commercial’
items.
These days most gliders are fitted with Tost wheels, some with Cleveland Wheels (and
brakes) and the Polish gliders go their own way with – to us – odd ball sizes of wheels, tyres
and tubes. Old British gliders were fitted with WW2 Fighter Aircraft tail wheels as their main
wheels. War surplus Spitfire or Hurricane tail wheels usually. Good quality wheels but now
the tyres are either very expensive if you can find one or just completely obsolete and not
made any more. One such wheel and tyre assembly has somehow found its way to be the
nose wheel of the Norfolk GCs K13! (Soon to be replaced with a Tost wheel and tyre).
Wheels and tyres are important as they form the interface between the ground and the glider,
often ignored until on a DI the bottom is found to be flat. They do deserve a little TLC.
Common defects found on tyres and wheels are:

--- PAGE 93 ---
88

Uneven wear across the tread

Cuts in the tread

Crazing on the tyre wall

Occasional genuine puncture

Burst tyre and tube

Leaking valve

Torn valve stem from tube

Bent or cracked wheel rims due to a heavy landing
Uneven wear across the tread is caused by towing the glider backwards by the tail dolly and
supporting a wing with the wing dolly. The glider is often wing low on the dolly side, the wing
dolly causes some drag and the glider is being towed very slightly sideways thus scuffing the
tyre and removing rubber on one shoulder. Turning the tyre on the wheel occasionally can even
out the wear but better still do not tow gliders in that fashion on hard surfaces. So bad ground
handling leads to excessive tyre wear and unnecessary expense.
Cuts in the tread are caused by sharp stones on the runway or taxiway. Not a lot one can do
about that other than sweep the areas clean. Tyres with deep cuts should be replaced earlier
rather than later.
Crazing on the sidewall is old age. As most gliders operate from grass areas the tread does not
get worn out and thus tyres do not get replaced. However, age plays its part and the rubber
decays causing crazing. Crazed tyres should be replaced before the sidewall gives way
completely – probably on a landing run - and may damage the wheel rim and possibly the
undercarriage or doors through flailing rubber bits.
Occasionally a tyre and tube will suffer a puncture, unavoidable issue unless the whole
airfield area is swept clean. Sometimes with the cheaper inner tubes the tube crazes and then
leaks out the air. One brand (cheap(er)) lasts about a year – 15 months before leaking. Buy
the more expensive versions but at least they well outlast the cheap ones.
Burst Tyres and Tubes are generally the responsibility of the pilot! Again there is no defence
against the ground arriving too hard and fast to the wheels. It happens more frequently with
tail wheels, less often with nose wheels and rarely with main wheels. A burst tyre/tube
indicates a heavy landing and so not only has the wheel and tyre assembly got to be inspected
but the whole glider subjected to a heavy landing check. Tost Wheels have ‘fins’ supporting
the rim of the wheel and these are designed to give way on heavy impact thus absorbing some
of the force involved. Minor distortion can probably be tolerated but if any part is cracked the
wheel should be replaced.
Leaking valve. Sometimes a little bit of dirt gets into the valve seat and there is a resultant
leak. If a tyre is found under inflated and there is no valve cap put a little spit over the valve
and see if it bubbles. If it does that is the problem. Depress the valve fully and with luck the
dirt might be dislodged and blown out. Inflate the tyre and try again. If there is still a leak
deflate the tyre by pressing the valve – do not remove it to deflate the tyre, the valve under
pressure may fly out and hit you in the eye. Remove the valve from the deflated tyre and fit a
new one. The Schreader valves are NOT regarded as 100% leak proof and that is why valve
caps are fitted; decent metal ones to aircraft tubes.

--- PAGE 94 ---
89
Valve Stems can be torn from the tube if the tube is dragged round the wheel by the tyre
moving in relation to the wheel. A rare occurrence on gliders. To see if a tyre has migrated
from its fitted position there are Creep Marks painted on the tyre and wheel – sometimes
painted on. Perhaps we should be more diligent in applying creep marks but we rarely do.
The references are good on what to do and look for when inspecting wheels and tyres.
Particularly good are the Michelin Course Notes Levels 1 and 2. You can read and learn the
contents and then take the short test found on the last pages of the pamphlet with DIY
marking.
Wheels and tyres should be treated with respect as they are quite capable of causing injury if
treated incorrectly. The reference material says that inflation should be carried out in a cage,
the wheel in the cage and you outside it. This precaution is there to contain wheel debris
should the two halves or rim of the wheel decide to part company whilst inflation is
underway. Although our tyre pressures are not very high there is a considerable force
involved. Area in square inches x pressure in pounds per square inch! Don’t lean over a tyre
whilst you inflate it just in case. Ensure the wheel bolts are the right size, correctly inserted
and tight before inflating the tyre. Above all ensure you are using the correct Units for the
tyre pressure not like the lad who tried to put 360 Bar into a Tornado main wheel instead of
360 psi! (Fortunately he ran out of nitrogen and 2000 psi).
When assembling the wheel and tyre – most are split wheels with older tail wheels being
solid – care has to be taken to get:

The internal spacer tube between the bearings lined up

The cutouts for the valve stem lined up

The tube not trapped between the two halves of the wheel

The tyre mounted correctly
The internal spacer takes the compression load across the axle and keeps side loads off the
ball bearings. It can be lined up by inserting the axle through both halves of the wheel prior to
bolting the two halves together. The spacer needs to be exactly the right length to do the job.
One half of the wheel has the exit hole for the valve stem, the two halves have cutouts in the
inner mating edges to allow the valve stem an exit to the inner part of the wheel. These have
to be lined up otherwise the halves will not come together.
The tyre needs to be mounted correctly with the tube inside it. The tyre, if of Aviation Spec,
will have a Red Dot on one side – this is ‘the light spot’ . The tyre will have been balanced
and the lightest spot found and marked with the red dot. This red dot has to be in line with the
valve – the heavy spot on the tube. That helps keep the wheel assembly balanced when
rotating. The tube should be lightly dusted with French Chalk before fitting inside the tyre to
help prevent abrasion and then slightly inflated till the cross section is about round. Put the
tyre and tube on the wheel so that the valve stem protrudes from the exit hole. Fit the spacer
tube, line up the cutout for the valve and then close the halves together and insert a bolt and
nut. Some wheels have integral nuts embedded whilst some disc braked wheels rely on
threaded holes in the brake disc for retaining the wheel halves. Check that the tube is not
trapped between the wheel halves by pressing together the wheel halves and listening for a
metallic sound, metal to metal. If this is not clear then ease the halves apart, check and try

--- PAGE 95 ---
90
again. Tighten the bolts finger tight and then check for a trapped tube by pushing one side of
the tyre bead over the centre joint of the wheel. Fully tighten the wheel bolts/nuts. Inflation is
best carried out in two stages, first remove the valve and inflate to working pressure and then
remove the tyre inflator. That should have seated the tyre bead on its seat. Insert the valve and
tighten finger tight and then inflate to working pressure. Check the pressure 24 hours later as
the tyre may expand and reduce the pressure.
Occasionally a tyre may not have a red dot, if there is not one then feel around inside the tyre
and see if there is a slightly raised pad. If there is this is the ‘heavy spot’ and the tyre should
be fitted with that pad opposite the valve.
Most aviation spec tyres are also marked with light green dots around the side wall. These
dots mark Awl Holes. The Awl is a sharp pointed tool and is used to make small holes through
the outer construction layers of the tyre to allow trapped air to escape. (Tyres are built of
layers of rubber and fabric cords on a cylindrical mandrel and then the ends of the resultant
tube are squashed inwards forming the basic shape of the tyre prior to being cured in a mould
in an autoclave).
Fit wheel, tyre and brake assembly to the undercarriage!
Removing and fitting a 210 x 65 or 200 x 50 tail wheel tyre to a solid wheel takes
considerable effort and patience. Small tyre levers are a necessary tool for that job.
To remove the tyre deflate the tube and then remove the valve. Free the tyre on both sides
from the bead with a tyre lever or use a vice as a press tool across the tyre and wheel. Mount
a steel bar of axle diameter vertically in a vice so that it can hold the wheel whilst you wrestle
with it. Place the wheel valve down on the steel bar. On the side diametrically opposed to the
valve stem push the tyre bead into the well in the centre of the wheel. Above the valve use a
tyre lever to lift the tyre bead over the wheel rim and a second tyre lever a bit further along.
Once some of the bead is outside the wheel the rest should come off easily. Remove the tube.
Then repeat the exercise with the tyre levers so the tyre comes all the way off the wheel.
Fitting the tyre is the reverse! Remove the valve from the new tube! Insert the lightly dusted
with French Chalk tube into the tyre, no red dot on these tyres. Lightly lubricate the tyre rim
with washing up detergent and fiddle the valve stem into its exit hole. Using fingers, put the
tyre bead opposite the valve stem over the wheel rim and into the well. With not too much
effort the rest of the tyre can be pushed over the rim. Lubricate the second bead seat round the
rim and slightly inside the tyre – just inside not all the way in. Again put the bead opposite
the valve stem over the rim and into the well. The next bit is the hard part, using your fingers
again push the tyre bead bit at a time over the wheel rim – yes it is hard and a lot of effort –
and finally the tyre bead should pop happily over the rim. If you find it necessary to resort to
using tyre levers to finish fitting the tyre be very careful not to nip and split the tube! Very
easily done. Some of these tail wheels need a piece of polythene tubing fitting over the valve
stem to prevent the stem sticking too far out of the wheel and causing a foul on the
undercarriage.
Note that it is inadvisable to reuse a second hand tube. The tubes stretch as the original tyre
increases in size and if one is put back into a new tyre it will crease up, rub and wear through
causing a puncture.

--- PAGE 96 ---
91
Bearings that feel lumpy, rough or difficult to turn have to be replaced. With the wheel
stripped the old bearing can be pressed out using a pillar drill as a press. Insert the new
bearing in reverse but ensure that the force used is on the outer race of the bearing and not on
the inner race – that can destroy the bearing before it is used. Press the bearing in square to
the wheel, if it cocks sideways it will jam or even damage the bearing housing. If the fit
seems really tight heat the wheel half first and then pop the bearing in. Be quick or the
bearing will heat up and expand and become difficult again. Always change both bearings,
not just one. If the bearing goes back in too easily then ensure that the outer race and the
housing are fully degreased and use Loctite Bearing Fit to retain the bearing (basically glue it
in place).
Tost and other manufacturers wheels rely on standard Ball or Taper Roller Bearings for their
rotation. All parts for Tost wheels and brakes are available. Wheel Bearings are available
from numerous UK suppliers. The bearing identification number is either embossed on a
rubber shield or on the outer race edge. RS Components also give a C of C. Buy good quality
bearings such as SKF. Tyres and tubes can be obtained from various aircraft parts suppliers or
maybe your local glider inspector. Certificates of Conformity and possibly a Form 1 or the
American equivalent Form 8130-3 are issued with tyres and tubes. Ensure that the work is
recorded in the log book and in a work pack and these forms are included. Most, if not all,
aviation spec tyres have serial numbers embossed on the tyre’s side wall, make sure the
paperwork agrees with it.
Tyres and tubes come in different qualities and prices, cheap and expensive. When buying
tyres it try to get a mid-range tyre, they last pretty well. The cheap ones probably don’t have
quite as much rubber in the tread and wear that off sooner rather than later. Some tyres are
made for specific gliders. A Schempp Hirth glider may have a 5” wheel and consequently a
5.00 x 5 Tyre but a standard tyre tends to rub on the slightly narrower undercarriage so Tost
now supply a narrow version of the 500 x 5 tyre and that is a 336x115-5, Tost Aero 10 PR.
For 210 x 65 tyres for the tail wheels buy Tost Aero ones, the Classic Aero brand tyre does
not fit, the bead diameter is too small. Tost make a 6 ply rating 200 x 50 tyre which is good
for self-launching sailplanes with tail wheel steering and heavy tail ends but the ‘commercial’
brand Vredestein sold by aviation tyre suppliers is OK for gliders and does come with a C of
C. I have heard of people trying to fit ‘wheel barrow tyres’, not a good idea, they are
relatively flimsy and not built to take landing loads or the high speeds that wheel barrows
never reach.

--- PAGE 97 ---
92