# Chapter 8

General Comments
Section 1
General Comments
Servicing and repairing gliders carries with it a serious responsibility for the safety of the
pilots who are going to venture aloft relying on your handywork! They will trust you
implicitly! They probably won’t think ‘Who worked on this glider? Do I trust him/her?’ they
will just get in and fly.
So how should you cope with that responsibility? No lecture here on Human Factors other
than to say we are Human and can make errors. Being an Aircraft Engineer does not make
you infallible! Having completed a job and on the basis that you probably value your neck
ask yourself the question: ‘Would I be happy to fly that glider?’ If the answer is ‘Yes’ then if
at all possible go and demonstrate that happiness by taking the machine aloft. If the answer is
‘No’ then you have an issue! If you have doubts about the work you have completed – why?
Maybe the job required skills that you thought you had but struggled to complete the task
anyway. If you have a task that you feel is above your pay grade then ask for advice and help
before or during the work and the person you ask will almost certainly assist. It is the way we
have all learnt our trade. Recognise your skill limits and say ‘No’ to a job rather than get
totally bogged down and worried about the final outcome.
Don’t let your Customer – Gliding Club or private owner – put you under a lot of stress
because the glider is needed tomorrow and the work is going to take a couple more days.
Stand your ground, perhaps apologise that it is not going to be available and hope that will be
accepted. If an argument is the result you can always tell the owner to pay his dues to date
and then take the glider elsewhere! (And it still won’t be available tomorrow)!
Work within the rules! There are plenty of rules to abide by and if you adhere to them that is
the best you can do. Do not take short-cuts, they rarely work, a friend has a poster in his
office:
How true is that? The problem with a flying machine is that if the job has not been done
properly it might only come to light whilst some distance above Terra Ferma.
So be confident – not over confident – in your skills and abilities, work within those limits
and learn from others, expand your skills and knowledge and then you can tackle those more
demanding tasks. It will not happen overnight. If you can find a practical course to advance
your skills, for example wanting to carry out Composite Repairs, then get on that course. Ask
a Repair Organisation or maybe even a Manufacturer if you can join them for a while so that
you can learn these skills.
Why is it that when there’s no me to do a job
properly there is always me to do it again!

--- PAGE 98 ---
93
Consider the servicing work carried out during an Annual Inspection as ‘Preventative
Maintenance’, you do not want to see that glider until the next Annual Inspection. Sloppy
Annual Inspections cause issues for the Owner, (perhaps he/she should not have gone for a
cheap job). Sloppy Annual Inspections have defects occurring withing a couple of weeks and
then the glider is taken to another Inspector for rectification. More often than not for
rectification of components such as gas struts with no pressure, failed release unit springs and
undercarriages that do not stay up, broken undercarriage structure and wheels with bolts
missing and bearings gone. Even a rusty wheel brake cable that failed resulted in a collision
and very significant damage to a wing. Nothing you can do about worn tyres, punctures or
inflicted damage. Assess tyres and brake linings especially on Club gliders, particularly two-
seaters. If the component will not last another year – change it! Don’t get drawn into offering
fixed price Annuals, it does not work like that.
Furthermore:
Try and keep abreast of regulation changes and updates. It happens on a regular basis and not
every change that occurs is broadcast to the world. The BGA Form that you downloaded last
month may have been superseded last week – have a quick check on the web site.
Every task carried out on a glider, motor glider or aircraft needs to be fully documented. The
job cards should say exactly what you have done if it is over and above the statements on the
Form 267. If you removed a component, stripped it, cleaned it, lubricated it and replaced it,
say so. You do not need to go to the Nth degree in detail but don’t just write ‘Item Removed’,
‘Item Replaced’.
Section 2
General Engineering Comments
To carry out aircraft engineering work effectively you need a tool kit maybe stating the
obvious. However, a decent tool kit should have good quality tools within. It is false
economy to buy cheap tools that will not last without distortion of spanner jaws, hexagonal
Allen Keys that loose the hexagonal shape when put under load, screwdrivers that have soft
ends that distort. OK, if necessary when starting out you buy cheaper tools but replace with
decent tooling that will last for years. Teng Tools, Draper Professional and Sealey
Professional are good makes along with some of Halfords tools. Tool kits or sets of spanners
in a box also helps tool control, you can see at a glance is a tool is missing after a job has
been completed. One source of good one-off tools is an outlet selling surplus military tooling

--- PAGE 99 ---
94
– always good quality and for a one-off special spanner or socket you cannot go wrong. Price
is usually good too.
There is an ever growing need for torque wrenches. The above mentioned tool manufacturers
supply good quality torque wrenches. These tools come in various torque strength ranges and
you would probably require three taking you up to say 300 Nm (Newton Metres). Again if
there is a Military Surplus tool available it will be of good quality and manufacturers will
repair and calibrate them for you. Your torque wrenches will need regular calibration checks.
Weighing Equipment is perhaps an added luxury for a volunteer inspector – not degrading the
‘volunteer’ bit - just meaning someone who is not carrying out the work on a full-time basis.
Some Gliding Clubs have their own weighing scales for everyone’s use. A full time Inspector
would find a set of scales a great addition to the workshop equipment. If you have three
scales you can weigh light aircraft as well as gliders. You need three scales anyway if you are
likely to weigh a Grob G109 or an SF25C with two wheels up front. Again this equipment
needs regular calibration checks.
Other hand tools that you will need on a regular basis are drills (electric and/or hand drill)
and drill bits, screw thread taps and dies, metric and UNF threads are commonly used with
BSF and BA threads on older British gliders and aircraft, reamers as and when needed can be
purchased as one-offs – adjustable reamers are very handy for odd-ball jobs. A set of Rivnut
tooling is almost a necessity as most GRP gliders have numerous Rivnuts fitted to hold seats
and panels in place and being aluminium the threads strip eventually and the item needs
replacing. Likewise Pop Riveting Tools are really handy for replacing anchor nuts and some
other lightweight attachment fittings.
Plan your task. If you are dismantling something take a lot of photos before you start, helps
on reassembly! Repairs need more thought than some folks realise. If you do Action A before
Action B then it may not be possible to do Action B. Fit components in the wrong order and
all of a sudden you have a problem and will need to remove some components to fit the one
you had left till later! No point in repairing a hole in the skin if you need access to carry out a
task inside that skin later on. Sit down with a coffee and really think through what you are
going to do. Break the whole job down into specific bite size pieces and write them down in
order. Then go through the list and think the job through, can each part be carried out or have
you snookered yourself?
Diagnosing the cause of a fault seems to be a dying art. You need to be able to come up with
the cause of a defect before you can fix it properly. We can all see a crack in a piece of
plywood and most can replace that bit of plywood. That action though has repaired the
symptom but not the cause of the crack. Unless the cause has been established and dealt with
the ply will crack again – and again. It is no good replacing a fuse time after time – what is
causing the fuse to blow? More often than not the ‘defect’ you are looking at is the symptom
of a defect yet to be found. Think laterally and understand the component or system you are
dealing with. Even ‘boffins’ are not immune from the failure of diagnosing a fault. Many
years ago British Aerospace, then responsible for the Jet Provost, and Dunlop, manufacturer
of the Mk3 Brake System Pressure Reducing Valve spent 2 years arguing and blaming each
other for a fault, or more correctly a symptom, that manifested itself as a momentary rise in
the Brake System Pressure when the dive brake was closed. The newcomer to this wrangling
said that this was bound to happen as the system stood and was nothing to worry about. There
was a moment of silence and disbelief that this person should say such a thing! It was then

--- PAGE 100 ---
95
explained to the boffins – designers and stress engineers – that as the vast quantity of
hydraulic oil was being fed back to the reservoir, the return line would be subjected to a rise
in pressure above its normal atmospheric pressure. That increase in pressure would be felt on
the pressure reducing valve adding to the spring force acting within the valve and thus
increase the Brake System Pressure whilst the return line was pressurised. The meeting called
for a pressure gauge to be inserted into the return line of a Jet Provost to prove that indeed
there was a pressure rise. There was and the whole subject put to bed!
Go and learn about the systems and aircraft structures – be inquisitive, ask questions, find out
how and why things work. Consider more abstract things like load paths through structures,
shear loads, compression loads and tensile loads. Take things apart and have a look to see
how it works. It is all amazing and how devious thinking solves problems. Take Concorde for
example. Its skin would get very hot because of air friction and ram air being pressurised and
heating up. Passengers need to be kept cool but the cold outside air normally used to do the
cooling – ram air – enters the aircraft at a high temperature. The air also has a quantity of heat
in calories, remove the calories and the temperature drops. That problem was solved with a
high degree of lateral thinking. The air could not be cooled by more ram air as that was also
hot. So what happened was that the incoming ram air was fed through a heat exchanger with
the engine fuel, calories removed from the ram air and put in the fuel. The hot fuel was fed
into the engines and effectively dumped the heat from the air overboard via the engines!
If you are going to get involved with wiring issues then you will need some electrical tools
too. A small soldering iron for plugs and sockets, crimp tooling for end terminals, hot air gun
for heat shrink tubing, Multimeter and no doubt other items.
Control cable tooling is something that is rarely found in your average tool box. NicoPress
tools are relatively expensive but a worthwhile addition to your tool collection as will be the
good pair of cable cutters you will need. Borrowing tools is OK occasionally but if you break
it ….!
Some workshop tooling you cannot buy – you have to make it! This calls for a little more
expertise in design and manufacturing. Sometimes the simple things make life a bit easier!
For example lining up undercarriage parts, bushes, wheels, centre tubes in wheels etc can be
frustrating. The same applies to other jobs requiring items to be lined up with a shaft. It is
useful to make up a collection of ‘bullets’ that can be attached to the axle or shaft prior to
inserting it. The bullet comprises a tapered piece of metal with a small diameter at one end
and a rebate or thread at the other to fit inside the hollow shaft or attached to the threaded end
of a bolt, (thread has to be smaller than the outside diameter of the bolt, some axles are 20mm
diameter with a 10mm thread at the end). The tapered bullet automatically lines up all the
fiddly bits that the axle or shaft has to pass through. The same principle can be used on Astir
and Libelle undercarriage pivot shafts. Astir and Libelle shafts can be removed by driving
them out. Once out drill the end and tap in a thread, M6 in the Astir and M8 in the Libelle. A
shaft with the appropriate thread can be screwed into the end of the shaft and a bullet in the
other to reinsert the shaft. Next time the shaft needs to come out screw in the extracting tool
(with handle fitted) and then the shaft can be pulled out quite easily.
Tools to operate control ‘Dog Drives’ in wing root ribs can be made from large sockets to go
over or inside the drive.

--- PAGE 101 ---
96
Maybe you need to drill a hole through two metal fittings sandwiching a 60mm wide piece of
wood. Each metal fitting has a hole for the bolt that will be inserted. Your drill needs to go
through the wood and out of the hole in the metal bracket the other side. Not nearly out of the
hole but exactly out of the hole. How can you guarantee success first time?
All that said but appreciating not everyone has access to a lathe and band saws. If you do
happen to have room for a small workshop or start doing glider repairs professionally the
following machines are recommended as very useful bits of equipment:

A Lathe, small Myford Super 7 is adequate. Turns bushes, shafts, threaded items,
Venture Outrigger Legs and a host of things you never thought you would need.

A band saw – or two. One for wood and plastics and one for metal cutting.

A Pillar Drill, makes holes, mixes Butyrate Dope in a milk churn, presses out wheel
bearings

A Planer/Thicknesser if you are going to do any serious woodwork

Circular Saw

A decent Router and selection of bits, again for woodwork

Selection of planes and chisels for woodwork

G Cramps and spring clips/grips, you can never have enough!

A compressed air supply is handy for air driven tools and a spray gun, before
purchase, ensure the compressor is up to the task by way of pressure and supply -
CFM, (cubic feet per minute). Caters for GRP work. Air tools, drill, small
sander/grinder for 2” discs, straight grinder tool for small shaping bits – diamond
tipped burrs etc,

GRP Tooling. Small diamond wheel cutter – air driven, rollers, paint brushes, waxes
and release agents.
It is preferable to have all your own tools and equipment rather than to borrow kit. If you
need a tool go and buy a good one there and then. You get what you need and no doubt that
task will come around again. If the occasion is literally a one-off job or a tool is an expensive
special tool and you can borrow it then that is OK but engineers do not like lending out
general tools even if they are a bit expensive to buy – they have the tools to do their work and
have invested in them. The owner of that tool or equipment may offer to come and do the job
for you and charge for the privilege!
Cultivate a good relationship with your parts suppliers and in particular with your local
friendly Aircraft Welder! Learn from your welder friend as to how he/she likes to have repair
jobs presented. Know repair schemes for tubes, sheet and solid metal components. Most
welding jobs need a jig to hold component parts in their relative positions whilst being
welded together. It may be just tack welding prior to a complete job being accomplished. A
lot of welders like to weld but do not always appreciate having to sort out the repair scheme,
order all the materials needed and then make the repair pieces and necessary jigs. From a
complete steel tube fuselage as in K13s etc to small repairs and modifications it helps to get
involved with the job and understand the processes. Making jigs is not rocket science, a jig
for a couple of pieces of tube or plate and tube can be as simple as a lump or two of body
filler to give the necessary support. If you are repairing a fitting or exhaust pipe and a part of
it is going to be cut out, make the jig round the old part before cutting it up! Jigs to repair a
broken wing or fuselage are significantly more complex – but you have time to learn!

--- PAGE 102 ---
97
Forge links with other Inspectors and Companies – yes we all talk to each other even if our
customers don’t think we do. Scheibe Aircraft for example – they do get visited in Germany –
have for some years told their UK customers to come and see Anglia Sailplanes and Nick (the
welder) if there are weld repairs to be carried out on Scheibe aircraft/gliders before
contemplating shipping the component to their premises in Germany. Between them they
have sorted out a number of repairs.
It is suggested that on your computer you keep:

Aircraft Records for the gliders you work on, Annual Servicings and
Repair/Component Replacement Jobs

A Register of Job Cards raised so that you have a numbering system

Lists of ADs, Tech Notes, Service Bulletins by glider type

A data base of Suppliers and what you can obtain from them

A Batch Number Book if you are supplying spare parts to Customers whose glider
you are not maintaining. You may stock some tyres and you send one to ‘Fred’ who
needs one, he also needs a C of C and maybe a Form 1 or 8130-3. In that case you
also need numbered Cs of C! Helps even if you are maintaining the glider.

Files for component manufacturers containing Manuals – but do check they are up to
date if using the information for a task.

Glider Flight and Maintenance Manuals and Illustrated Parts Lists. Same applies –
ensure they are up to date if you need to use anything but basic information.
If you are so inclined then a CAD drawing program is handy. You can design a modified
component, draw repair pieces for laser cutting or routing out wooden components. Great
system for laying out new instrument panels – have a stock of instrument outlines and
attachment holes and ‘nest’ them all on one drawing. Have the ‘panel’ cut in mild or stainless
steel with all the holes then attach it to the actual panel and drill all the holes and with hole
saws cut the holes for the instrument faces. No end of uses.
None of the above is mandatory of course, just something the Author has found useful over
the years.
If you don’t know something and cannot find an answer on the ‘net’ don’t be afraid to ask
someone who can point you in the right direction, it is how you will learn Aeronautical
Engineering! If necessary ask the Chief Technical Officer!
Should a Manufacturer offer you some ‘Work Experience’ in their factory then you should
grab it with both hands. Go and visit Manufacturers and other repair organisations, they
won’t bite your head off and from experience Glider Manufacturers always seem happy to
give you the guided tour.
If you find a defect or a component that needs replacing with an alternative part that is a
modification, or to give it the correct term ‘Minor Change’, then don’t be afraid to think
through what needs doing and contemplate applying to EASA or the CAA for such a Minor
Change. There is a process to go through, a Minor Change Leaflet to write saying How, Why,
When and Where all sent off with the inevitable fee and sit back and await the questions still
to be answered! Folks on the receiving end of the Minor Change are generally quite helpful.

--- PAGE 103 ---
98
Acknowledgements
The Author would like to thank the following for their support in supplying information,
drawings and use of their pictures:
Cleveland Wheels and Brakes
Simply Bearings Ltd
Tost GmbH
Anglia Sailplanes for Various drawings, photographs and copies of Weighing Documents
Glider Manufacturers for extracts from the Flight and Maintenance Manuals
The British Gliding Association for extracts from the AMP and other documents.