# AC43.13-1B Chapter 11 — Aircraft Electrical Systems

9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 11-1
Page 11-1
CHAPTER 11.  AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS
SECTION 1.  INSPECTION AND CARE OF ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS
11-1. GENERAL.  The term “electrical
system” as used in this AC means those parts
of the aircraft that generate, distribute, and use
electrical energy, including their support and
attachments.  The satisfactory performance of
an aircraft is dependent upon the continued re-
liability of the electrical system.  Damaged
wiring or equipment in an aircraft, regardless
of how minor it may appear to be, cannot be
tolerated.  Reliability of the system is propor-
tional to the amount of maintenance received
and the knowledge of those who perform such
maintenance.  It is, therefore, important that
maintenance be accomplished using the best
techniques and practices to minimize the pos-
sibility of failure.  This chapter is not intended
to supersede or replace any government speci-
fication or specific manufacturer’s instruction
regarding electrical system inspection and re-
pair.
11-2. INSPECTION AND OPERATION
CHECKS.  Inspect equipment, electrical as-
semblies, and wiring installations for damage,
general condition, and proper functioning to
ensure the continued satisfactory operation of
the electrical system.  Adjust, repair, overhaul,
and test electrical equipment and systems in
accordance with the recommendations and
procedures in the aircraft and/or component
manufacturer’s maintenance instructions.  Re-
place components of the electrical system that
are damaged or defective with identical parts,
with aircraft manufacturer’s approved equip-
ment, or its equivalent to the original in oper-
ating characteristics, mechanical strength, and
environmental specifications.  A list of sug-
gested problems to look for and checks (Refer
to the glossary for a description of the check
types) to be performed are:
a. Damaged, discolored, or overheated
equipment, connections, wiring, and installa-
tions.
b. Excessive heat or discoloration at high
current carrying connections.
c. Misalignment of electrically driven
equipment.
d. Poor electrical bonding (broken, dis-
connected or corroded bonding strap) and
grounding, including evidence of corrosion.
e. Dirty equipment and connections.
f. Improper, broken, inadequately sup-
ported wiring and conduit, loose connections
of terminals, and loose ferrules.
g. Poor mechanical or cold solder joints.
h. Condition of circuit breaker and
fuses.
i. Insufficient clearance between exposed
current carrying parts and ground or poor in-
sulation of exposed terminals.
j. Broken or missing safety wire, broken
bundle lacing, cotter pins, etc.
k. Operational check of electrically oper-
ated equipment such as motors, inverters, gen-
erators, batteries, lights, protective devices,
etc.
l. Ensure that ventilation and cooling air
passages are clear and unobstructed.
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 11-2
Par 11-2
m. Voltage check of electrical system
with portable precision voltmeter.
n. Condition of electric lamps.
o. Missing safety shields on exposed
high-voltage terminals (i.e., 115/200V ac).
11-3. FUNCTIONAL CHECK OF
STAND-BY OR EMERGENCY EQUIP-
MENT.  An aircraft should have functional
tests performed at regular intervals as pre-
scribed by the manufacturer.  The inspections
or functional check periods should be clearly
stated in the aircraft maintenance manual,
along with the overhaul intervals.
11-4. CLEANING 
AND 
PRESERVA-
TION.  Annual cleaning of electrical equip-
ment to remove dust, dirt, and grime is rec-
ommended.  Suitable solvents or fine abrasives
that will not score the surface or remove the
plating may be used to clean the terminals and
mating surfaces if they are corroded or dirty.
Only cleaning agents that do not leave any type
of residue must be used.  Components must be
cleaned and preserved in accordance with the
aircraft handbooks or manufacturer’s instruc-
tions.  Avoid using emery cloth to polish
commutators or slip rings because particles
may cause shorting and burning.  Be sure that
protective finishes are not scored or damaged
when cleaning.  Ensure that metal-to-metal
electrically bonded surfaces are treated at the
interface with a suitable anti-corrosive con-
ductive coating, and that the joint is sealed
around the edges by restoring the original
primer and paint finish.  Connections that must
withstand a highly corrosive environment may
be encapsulated with an approved sealant in
order to prevent corrosion.
CAUTION:  Turn power off before
cleaning.
11-5. BATTERY ELECTROLYTE COR-
ROSION.  Corrosion found on or near lead-
acid batteries can be removed mechanically
with a stiff bristle brush and then chemically
neutralized with a 10 percent sodium bicar-
bonate and water solution.  For Nickel Cad-
mium (NiCad) batteries, a 3 percent solution
of acetic acid can be used to neutralize the
electrolyte.  After neutralizing, the battery
should be washed with clean water and thor-
oughly dried.
11-6. ADJUSTMENT AND REPAIR.  Ac-
complish adjustments to items of equipment
such as regulators, alternators, generators,
contactors, control devices, inverters, and re-
lays at a location outside the aircraft, and on a
test stand or test bench where all necessary in-
struments and test equipment are at hand.
Follow the adjustment and repair procedures
outlined by the equipment or aircraft manu-
facturer.  Replacement or repair must be ac-
complished as a part of routine maintenance.
Adjustment of a replacement voltage regulator
is likely since there will always be a difference
in impedance between the manufacturer’s test
equipment and the aircraft’s electrical system.
11-7. INSULATION OF ELECTRICAL
EQUIPMENT.  In some cases, electrical
equipment is connected into a heavy current
circuit, perhaps as a control device or relay.
Such equipment is normally insulated from the
mounting structure since grounding the frame
of the equipment may result in a serious
ground fault in the event of equipment internal
failure.  Stranded 18 or 20 AWG wire should
be used as a grounding strap to avoid shock
hazard to equipment and personnel.  If the end
connection is used for shock hazard, the
ground wire must be large enough to carry the
highest possible current (0.1 to 0.2 ohms
max.).
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 11-8
Page 11-3 (and 11-4)
11-8. BUS BARS.  Annually check bus bars
for general condition, cleanliness, and security
of all attachments and terminals.  Grease, cor-
rosion, or dirt on any electrical junction may
cause the connections to overheat and eventu-
ally fail.  Bus bars that exhibit corrosion, even
in limited amounts, should be disassembled,
cleaned and brightened, and reinstalled.
11-9.11-14. [RESERVED.]
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 11-15
Page 11-5
SECTION 2.  STORAGE BATTERIES
11-15. GENERAL.  Aircraft batteries may
be used for many functions, e.g., ground
power, emergency power, improving DC bus
stability, and fault-clearing.  Most small pri-
vate aircraft use lead-acid batteries.  Most
commercial and military aircraft use NiCad
batteries.  However, other types are becoming
available such as gel cell and sealed lead-acid
batteries.  The battery best suited for a par-
ticular application will depend on the relative
importance of several characteristics, such as
weight, cost, volume, service or shelf life, dis-
charge rate, maintenance, and charging rate.
Any change of battery type may be considered
a major alteration.
a. Storage batteries are usually identified
by the material used for the plates.  All battery
types possess different characteristics and,
therefore, must be maintained in accordance
with the manufacturer’s recommendations..
WARNING:  It is extremely danger-
ous to store or service lead-acid and
NiCad batteries in the same area.  In-
troduction of acid electrolytes into al-
kaline electrolyte will destroy the Ni-
Cad and vice-versa.
11-16. BATTERY CHARGING.  Operation
of storage batteries beyond their ambient tem-
perature or charging voltage limits can result in
excessive cell temperatures leading to electro-
lyte boiling, rapid deterioration of the cells,
and battery failure.  The relationship between
maximum charging voltage and the number of
cells in the battery is also significant.  This will
determine (for a given ambient temperature
and state of charge) the rate at which energy is
absorbed as heat within the battery.  For lead-
acid batteries, the voltage per cell must not ex-
ceed 2.35 volts.  In the case of NiCad batteries,
the charging voltage limit varies with design
and 
construction. 
 
Values 
of
1.4 and 1.5 volts per cell are generally used.  In
all cases, follow the recommendations of the
battery manufacturer.
11-17. BATTERY FREEZING.  Discharged
lead-acid batteries exposed to cold tempera-
tures are subject to plate damage due to freez-
ing of the electrolyte.  To prevent freezing
damage, maintain each cell’s specific gravity
at 1.275, or for sealed lead-acid batteries check
“open” circuit voltage.  (See table 11-1.)  Ni-
Cad battery electrolyte is not as susceptible to
freezing because no appreciable chemical
change takes place between the charged and
discharged states.  However, the electrolyte
will freeze at approximately minus 75 °F.
NOTE:  Only a load check will deter-
mine overall battery condition.
TABLE 11-1. Lead-acid battery electrolyte freezing
points.
Specific
Freeze point
State of Charge (SOC) for sealed
lead-acid batteries at 70°
Gravity
C.
F.
SOC
12 volt
24 volt
1.300
-70
-95
100%
12.9
25.8
1.275
-62
-80
75%
12.7
25.4
1.250
-52
-62
50%
12.4
24.8
1.225
-37
-35
25%
12.0
24.0
1.200
-26
-16
1.175
-20
-4
1.150
-15
+5
1.125
-10
+13
1.100
-8
+19
11-18. TEMPERATURE CORRECTION.
U.S. manufactured lead-acid batteries are con-
sidered fully charged when the specific gravity
reading is between 1.275 and 1.300.  A
1/3 discharged battery reads about 1.240 and a
2/3 discharged battery will show a specific
gravity reading of about 1.200, when tested by
a hydrometer and the electrolyte temperature is
80 F.  However, to determine precise specific
gravity readings, a temperature correction (see
table 11-2) 
should 
be 
applied 
to 
the
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 11-6
Par 11-18
hydrometer indication.  As an example, a hy-
drometer reading of 1.260 and the temperature
of the electrolyte at 40 °F, the corrected spe-
cific gravity reading of the electrolyte is 1.244.
TABLE 11-2. Sulfuric acid temperature correction.
Electrolyte
Temperature
Points to be subtracted or added to
°C
°F
specific gravity readings
60
55
49
43
38
33
27
23
15
10
5
-2
-7
-13
-18
-23
-28
-35
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
+24
+20
+16
+12
+8
+4
0
-4
-8
-12
-16
-20
-24
-28
-32
-36
-40
-44
11-19. BATTERY MAINTENANCE.
Battery inspection and maintenance procedures
vary with the type of chemical technology and
the type of physical construction.  Always fol-
low the battery manufacturer’s approved pro-
cedures.  Battery performance at any time in a
given application will depend upon the bat-
tery’s age, state of health, state of charge, and
mechanical integrity.
a. Age.  To determine the life and age of
the battery, record the install date of the battery
on the battery.  During normal battery mainte-
nance, battery age must be documented either
in the aircraft maintenance log or in the shop
maintenance log.
b. State of Health.  Lead-acid battery
state of health may be determined by duration
of service interval (in the case of vented bat-
teries), by environmental factors (such as ex-
cessive heat or cold), and by observed electro-
lyte leakage (as evidenced by corrosion of
wiring and connectors or accumulation of
powdered salts).  If the battery needs to be re-
filled often, with no evidence of external leak-
age, this may indicate a poor state of the bat-
tery, the battery charging system, or an over
charge condition.
(1) Use a hydrometer to determine the
specific gravity of the battery electrolyte,
which is the weight of the electrolyte com-
pared to the weight of pure water.
(2) Take care to ensure the electrolyte is
returned to the cell from which it was ex-
tracted.  When a specific gravity difference
of 0.050 or more exists between cells of a bat-
tery, the battery is approaching the end of its
useful life and replacement should be consid-
ered.  Electrolyte level may be adjusted by the
addition of distilled water.
c. State of Charge.  Battery state of
charge will be determined by the cumulative
effect of charging and discharging the battery.
In a normal electrical charging system the bat-
tery’s generator or alternator restores a battery
to full charge during a flight of one hour to
ninety minutes.
d. Mechanical Integrity.  Proper me-
chanical integrity involves the absence of any
physical damage as well as assurance that
hardware is correctly installed and the battery
is properly connected.  Battery and battery
compartment venting system tubes, nipples
and attachments, when required, provide a
means of avoiding the potential buildup of ex-
plosive gases, and should be checked periodi-
cally to ensure that they are securely connected
and oriented in accordance with the mainte-
nance manual’s installation procedures.  Al-
ways follow procedures approved for the spe-
cific aircraft and battery system to ensure that
the battery system is capable of delivering
specified performance.
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 11-19
Page 11-7
e. Battery and Charger Characteristics.
The following information is provided to ac-
quaint the user with characteristics of the more
common aircraft battery and battery charger
types.  Products may vary from these descrip-
tions due to different applications of available
technology.  Consult the manufacturer for spe-
cific performance data.
NOTE:  Under no circumstances con-
nect a lead-acid battery to a charger,
unless properly serviced.
(1) Lead-acid vented batteries have a
two volt nominal cell voltage.  Batteries are
constructed so that individual cells cannot be
removed.  Occasional addition of water is re-
quired to replace water loss due to overcharg-
ing in normal service. Batteries that become
fully discharged may not accept recharge.
(2) Lead-acid sealed batteries are simi-
lar in most respects to lead-acid vented batter-
ies, but do not require the addition of water.
(3) The lead-acid battery is economical
and has extensive application, but is heavier
than an equivalent performance battery of an-
other type.  The battery is capable of a high
rate of discharge and low temperature per-
formance.  However, maintaining a high rate
of discharge for a period of time usually warps
the cell plates, shorting out the battery.  Its
electrolyte has a moderate specific gravity, and
state of charge can be checked with a hy-
drometer.
(4) Do not use high amperage automo-
tive battery chargers to charge aircraft
batteries.
(5) NiCad vented batteries have a
1.2 volt nominal cell voltage.  Occasional ad-
dition of distilled water is required to replace
water loss due to overcharging in normal
service.  Cause of failure is usually shorting or
weakening of a cell.  After replacing the bad
cell with a good cell, the battery’s life can be
extended for five or more years.  Full dis-
charge is not harmful to this type of battery.
(6) NiCad sealed batteries are similar in
most respects to NiCad vented batteries, but do
not normally require the addition of water.
Fully discharging the battery (to zero volts)
may cause irreversible damage to one or more
cells, leading to eventual battery failure due to
low capacity.
(7) The state of charge of a NiCad bat-
tery cannot be determined by measuring the
specific gravity of the potassium hydroxide
electrolyte.  The electrolyte specific gravity
does not change with the state of charge.  The
only accurate way to determine the state of
charge of a NiCad battery is by a measured
discharge with a NiCad battery charger and
following the manufacturer’s instructions.
After the battery has been fully charged and
allowed to stand for at least two hours, the
fluid level may be adjusted, if necessary, using
distilled or demineralized water.  Because the
fluid level varies with the state of charge, wa-
ter should never be added while the battery is
installed in the aircraft.  Overfilling the battery
will result in electrolyte spewage during
charging.  This will cause corrosive effects on
the cell links, self-discharge of the battery, di-
lution of the electrolyte density, possible
blockage of the cell vents, and eventual cell
rupture.
(8) Lead-acid 
batteries 
are 
usually
charged by regulated DC voltage sources.  This
allows maximum accumulation of charge in
the early part of recharging.
(9) Constant-current battery chargers
are usually provided for NiCad batteries be-
cause the NiCad cell voltage has a negative
temperature coefficient.  With a constant-
voltage charging source, a NiCad battery
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 11-8
Par 11-19
having a shorted cell might overheat due to ex-
cessive overcharge and undergo a thermal run-
away, destroying the battery and creating a
possible safety hazard to the aircraft.
DEFINITION:  Thermal runaway can
result in a chemical fire and/or explo-
sion of the NiCad battery under re-
charge by a constant-voltage source,
and is due to cyclical, ever-increasing
temperature and charging current.
One or more shorted cells or an exist-
ing high temperature and low charge
can produce the cyclical sequence of
events: 
 
(1) excessive 
current,
(2) increased 
temperature,
(3) decreased 
cell(s) 
resistance,
(4) further increased current, and
(5) further 
increased 
temperature.
This will not become a self-sustaining
thermal-chemical action if the con-
stant-voltage charging source is re-
moved before the battery temperature
is in excess of 160 °F.
(10) Pulsed-current battery chargers are
sometimes provided for NiCad batteries.
CAUTION:  It is important to use the
proper charging procedures for bat-
teries under test and maintenance.
These charging regimes for recondi-
tioning and charging cycles are de-
fined by the aircraft manufacturer
and should be closely followed.
f. Shop-Level Maintenance Procedures.
Shop procedures must follow the manufac-
turer’s recommendations. Careful examination
of sealed batteries and proper reconditioning of
vented batteries will ensure the longest possi-
ble service life.
g. Aircraft Battery Inspection.
(1) Inspect battery sump jar and lines
for condition and security.
(2) Inspect battery terminals and quick-
disconnect plugs and pins for evidence of cor-
rosion, pitting, arcing, and burns.  Clean as re-
quired.
(3) Inspect battery drain and vent lines
for restriction, deterioration, and security.
(4) Routine pre-flight and post-flight
inspection procedures should include observa-
tion for evidence of physical damage, loose
connections, and electrolyte loss.
11-20. ELECTROLYTE SPILLAGE.
Spillage or leakage of electrolyte may result in
serious corrosion of the nearby structure or
control elements as both sulfuric acid and po-
tassium hydroxide are actively corrosive.
Electrolyte may be spilled during ground
servicing, leaked when cell case rupture oc-
curs, or sprayed from cell vents due to exces-
sive charging rates.  If the battery is not case
enclosed, properly treat structural parts near
the battery that may be affected by acid fumes.
Treat all case and drain surfaces, that have
been affected by electrolyte, with a solution of
sodium bicarbonate (for acid electrolyte) or
boric acid, vinegar, or a 3 percent solution of
acetic 
acid 
(for 
potassium 
hydroxide
electrolyte).
CAUTION:  Serious burns will result
if the electrolyte comes in contact with
any part of the body.  Use rubber
gloves, rubber apron, and protective
goggles when handling electrolyte.  If
sulfuric acid is splashed on the body,
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 11-20
Page 11-9
neutralize with a solution of baking
soda and water, and shower or flush
the affected area with water. For the
eyes, use an eye fountain and flush
with an abundance of water.  If potas-
sium hydroxide contacts the skin, neu-
tralize with 9 percent acetic acid,
vinegar, or lemon juice and wash with
water.  For the eyes, wash with a weak
solution of boric acid or a weak solu-
tion of vinegar and flush with water.
11-21. NOXIOUS FUMES.  When charging
rates are excessive, the electrolyte may boil to
the extent that fumes containing droplets of the
electrolyte are emitted through the cell vents.
These fumes from lead-acid batteries may be-
come noxious to the crew members and pas-
sengers; therefore, thoroughly check the vent-
ing system.  NiCad batteries will emit gas near
the end of the charging process and during
overcharge.  The battery vent system in the air-
craft should have sufficient air flow to prevent
this explosive mixture from accumulating.  It
is often advantageous to install a jar in the
battery vent discharge system serviced with an
agent to neutralize the corrosive effect of bat-
tery vapors.
11-22. INSTALLATION PRACTICES.
a. External Surface.  Clean the external
surface of the battery prior to installation in the
aircraft.
b. Replacing 
Lead-Acid 
Batteries.
When replacing lead-acid batteries with NiCad
batteries, a battery temperature or current
monitoring system must be installed.  Neu-
tralize the battery box or compartment and
thoroughly flush with water and dry.  A flight
manual supplement must also be provided for
the NiCad battery installation.  Acid residue
can be detrimental to the proper functioning of
a NiCad battery, as alkaline will be to a lead-
acid battery.
c. Battery Venting.  Battery fumes and
gases may cause an explosive mixture or con-
taminated compartments and should be dis-
persed by adequate ventilation.  Venting sys-
tems often use ram pressure to flush fresh air
through the battery case or enclosure to a safe
overboard discharge point.  The venting sys-
tem pressure differential should always be
positive, and remain between recommended
minimum and maximum values.  Line runs
should not permit battery overflow fluids or
condensation to be trapped and prevent free
airflow.
d. Battery Sump Jars.  A battery sump
jar installation may be incorporated in the
venting system to dispose of battery electrolyte
overflow.  The sump jar should be of adequate
design and the proper neutralizing agent used.
The sump jar must be located only on the dis-
charge side of the battery venting system.  (See
figure 11-1.)
FIGURE 11-1. Battery ventilating systems.
e. Installing Batteries.  When installing
batteries in an aircraft, exercise care to prevent
inadvertent shorting of the battery terminals.
Serious damage to the aircraft structure (frame,
skin and other subsystems, avionics, wire, fuel
etc.) can be sustained by the resultant high dis-
charge of electrical energy.  This condition
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 11-10
Par 11-22
may normally be avoided by insulating the
terminal posts during the installation process.
Remove the grounding lead first for battery
removal, then the positive lead.  Connect the
grounding lead of the battery last to minimize
the risk of shorting the “hot terminal” of the
battery during installation.
f. Battery Hold Down Devices.  Ensure
that the battery hold down devices are secure,
but not so tight as to exert excessive pressure
that may cause the battery to buckle causing
internal shorting of the battery.
g. Quick-Disconnect Type Battery.  If a
quick-disconnect type of battery connector,
that prohibits crossing the battery lead is not
employed, ensure that the aircraft wiring is
connected to the proper battery terminal.  Re-
verse polarity in an electrical system can seri-
ously damage a battery and other electrical
components.  Ensure that the battery cable
connections are tight to prevent arcing or a
high resistance connection.
11-23.11-29. [RESERVED.]
9/27/01
AC 43.13-1B CHG 1
Par 11-30
Page 11-11
SECTION 3.  INSPECTION OF EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION
11-30. GENERAL.  When installing equip-
ment which consumes electrical power in an
aircraft, it should be determined that the total
electrical load can be safely controlled or man-
aged within the rated limits of the affected
components of the aircraft’s electrical power
supply system.  Addition of most electrical
utilization equipment is a major alteration and
requires appropriate FAA approval.  The elec-
trical load analysis must be prepared in general
accordance with good engineering practices.
Additionally, an addendum to the flight man-
ual is generally required.
11-31. INSTALLATION 
CLEARANCE
PROVISIONS.  All electrical equipment
should be installed so that inspection and
maintenance may be performed and that the in-
stallation does not interfere with other systems,
such as engine or flight controls.
11-32. WIRES, WIRE BUNDLES, AND
CIRCUIT PROTECTIVE DEVICES.  Be-
fore any aircraft electrical load is increased, the
new total electrical load (previous maximum
load plus added load) must be checked to de-
termine if the design levels are being ex-
ceeded.  Where necessary, wires, wire bundles,
and circuit protective devices having the cor-
rect ratings should be added or replaced.
11-33. ALTERNATOR DIODES.  Alter-
nators employ diodes for the purpose of con-
verting the alternating current to direct current.
These diodes are solid-state electronic devices
and are easily damaged by rough handling,
abuse, over heating, or reversing the battery
connections. A voltage surge in the line, if it
exceeds the  design  value, may  destroy the di-
ode. The best protection against diode destruction
by voltage surges is to make certain that the bat-
tery is never disconnected from the aircraft's
electrical system when the alternator is in op-
eration. The battery acts as a large capacitor
and tends to damp out voltage surges. The
battery must never be connected with reversed
polarity as this may subject the diodes to a
forward bias condition, allowing very high cur-
rent conduction that will generally destroy
them instantly.
11-34. 
STATIC 
ELECTRICAL 
POWER
CONVERTERS.  Static power converters em-
ploy solid-state devices to convert the aircraft’s
primary electrical source voltage to a different
voltage or frequency for the operation of radio
and electronic equipment.  They contain no
moving parts (with the exception of a cooling
fan on some models) and are relatively main-
tenance free.  Various types are available for ac
to dc or dc to ac conversion.
a. Location of static converters should
be carefully chosen to ensure adequate venti-
lation for cooling purposes. Heat-radiating fins
should be kept clean of dirt and other foreign
matter that may impair their cooling proper-
ties.
b. Static power converters often emit un-
acceptable levels of EMI that may disrupt
communication equipment and navigation in-
struments. Properly shielded connectors, ter-
minal blocks, and wires may be required, with
all shields well grounded to the airframe.
CAUTION:  Do not load convert-
ers beyond their rated capacity.
AC 43.13-1B CHG 1
9/27/01
Page 11-12
Par 11-35
11-35. ACCEPTABLE 
MEANS 
OF
CONTROLLING OR MONITORING THE
ELECTRICAL LOAD.
a. Output Rating.  The generator or al-
ternator output ratings and limits prescribed by
the manufacturer must be checked against the
electrical loads that can be imposed on the af-
fected generator or alternator by installed
equipment.  When electrical load calculations
show that the total continuous electrical load
can exceed 80 percent output load limits of the
generator or alternator, and where special plac-
ards or monitoring devices are not installed,
the electrical load must be reduced or the gen-
erating capacity of the charging system must
be increased. (This is strictly a “rule of thumb”
method and should not be confused with an
electrical load analysis, which is a complete
and accurate analysis, which is a complete and
accurate of the composite aircraft power
sources and all electrical loads)  When a stor-
age battery is part of the electrical power sys-
tem, the battery will be continuously charged
in flight.
b. The use of placards is recommended
to inform the pilot and/or crew members of the
combination(s) of loads that may be connected
to each power source.  Warning lights can be
installed that will be triggered if the battery
bus voltage drops below 13 volts on a 14-volt
system or 26 volts on a 28-volt system.
c. For installations where the ammeter is
in the battery lead, and the regulator system
limits the maximum current that the generator
or alternator can deliver, a voltmeter can be in-
stalled on the system bus.  As long as the am-
meter never reads “discharge” (except for short
intermittent loads such as operating the gear
and flaps) and the voltmeter remains at “sys-
tem voltage,” the generator or alternator will
not be overloaded.
d. In installations where the ammeter is
in the generator or alternator lead and the
regulator system does not limit the maximum
current that the generator or alternator can de-
liver, the ammeter can be redlined at
100 percent of the generator or alternator rat-
ing.  If the ammeter reading is never allowed
to exceed the red line, except for short inter-
mittent loads, the generator or alternator will
not be overloaded.
e. Where the use of placards or moni-
toring devices is not practical or desired, and
where assurance is needed that the battery will
be charged in flight, the total continuous con-
nected electrical load should be held to ap-
proximately 80 percent of the total generator
output capacity.  When more than one genera-
tor is used in parallel, the total rated output is
the combined output of the installed genera-
tors.
f. When two or more generators and al-
ternators are operated in parallel and the total
connected system load can exceed the rated
output of a single generator, a method should
be provided for quickly coping with a sudden
overload that can be caused by generator or
engine failure.  A quick load reduction system
or procedure should be identified whereby the
total load can be reduced by the pilot to a
quantity within the rated capacity of the re-
maining operable generator or generators.
11-36. ELECTRICAL LOAD DETER-
MINATION.  The connected load of an air-
craft’s electrical system may be determined by
any one or a combination of several acceptable
methods, techniques, or practices.  However,
those with a need to know the status of a par-
ticular aircraft’s electrical system should have
accurate and up-to-date data concerning the
capacity of the installed electrical power
source(s) and the load(s) imposed by installed
electrical power-consuming devices.  Such
9/27/01
AC 43.13-1B CHG 1
Par 11-38
Page 11-13 (and 11-14)
data should provide a true picture of the status
of the electrical system.  New or additional
electrical devices should not be installed in an
aircraft, nor the capacity changed of any power
source, until the status of the electrical system
in the aircraft has been determined accurately
and found not to adversely affect the integrity
of the electrical system.
11-37. JUNCTION BOX CONSTRUC-
TION.  Replacement junction boxes should be
fabricated using the same material as the origi-
nal or from a fire-resistant, nonabsorbent mate-
rial, such as aluminum, or an acceptable plastic
material.  Where fire-proofing is necessary, a
stainless steel junction box is recommended.
Rigid construction will prevent “oil-canning”
of the box sides that could result in internal
short circuits.  In all cases, drain holes should
be provided in the lowest portion of the box.
Cases of electrical power equipment must be
insulated from metallic structure to avoid
ground fault related fires.  (See para-
graph 11-7.)
a. Internal Arrangement.  The junction
box arrangement should permit easy access to
any installed items of equipment, terminals,
and wires.  Where marginal clearances are un-
avoidable, an insulating material should be in-
serted between current carrying parts and any
grounded surface.  It is not good practice to
mount equipment on the covers or doors of
junction boxes, since inspection for internal
clearance is impossible when the door or cover
is in the closed position.
b. Installation. Junction boxes should be
securely mounted to the aircraft structure in
such a manner that the contents are readily ac-
cessible for inspection.  When possible, the
open side should face downward or at an angle
so that loose metallic objects, such as washers
or nuts, will tend to fall out of the junction box
rather than wedge between terminals.
c. Wiring.  Junction box layouts should
take into consideration the necessity for ade-
quate wiring space and possible future addi-
tions. Electrical wire bundles should be laced
or clamped inside the box so that cables do not
touch other components, prevent ready access,
or obscure markings or labels.  Cables at en-
trance openings should be protected against
chafing by using grommets or other suitable
means.
11-38.11-46. [RESERVED.]
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 11-47
Page 11-15
SECTION 4.  INSPECTION OF CIRCUIT-PROTECTION DEVICES
11-47. GENERAL.  All electrical wires
must be provided with some means of circuit
protection.  Electrical wire should be protected
with circuit breakers or fuses located as close
as possible to the electrical power source bus.
Normally, the manufacturer of electrical
equipment will specify the fuse or breaker to
be used when installing the respective equip-
ment, or SAE publication, ARP 1199, may be
referred to for recommended practices.
11-48. DETERMINATION OF CIRCUIT
BREAKER RATINGS.  Circuit protection
devices must be sized to supply open circuit
capability.  A circuit breaker must be rated so
that it will open before the current rating of the
wire attached to it is exceeded, or before the
cumulative rating of all loads connected to it
are exceeded, whichever is lowest.  A circuit
breaker must always open before any compo-
nent downstream can overheat and generate
smoke or fire.  Wires must be sized to carry
continuous current in excess of the circuit
protective device rating, including its time-
current characteristics, and to avoid excessive
voltage drop.  Refer to section 5 for wire rating
methods.
11-49. DC 
CIRCUIT 
PROTECTOR
CHART.  Table 11-3 may be used as a guide
for the selection of circuit breaker and fuse
rating to protect copper conductor wire.  This
chart was prepared for the conditions speci-
fied.  If actual conditions deviate materially
from those stated, ratings above or below the
values recommended may be justified.  For ex-
ample, a wire run individually in the open air
may possibly be protected by the circuit
breaker of the next higher rating to that shown
on the chart.  In general, the chart is conserva-
tive 
for 
all 
ordinary 
aircraft 
electri-
cal installations.
TABLE 11-3. DC wire and circuit protector chart.
Wire AN gauge
copper
Circuit breaker amp.
Fuse amp.
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1
0
5
7.5
10
15
20
30
40
50
80
100
125
5
5
10
10
15
20
30
50
70
70
100
150
150
  Basis of chart:
(1) Wire bundles in 135 °F. ambient and altitudes up to
30,000 feet.
(2) Wire bundles of 15 or more wires, with wires carrying
no  more than 20 percent of the total current carrying
capacity of the bundle as given in Specification
MIL-W-5088 (ASG).
(3) Protectors in 75 to 85 °F. ambient.
(4) Copper wire Specification MIL-W-5088.
(5) Circuit breakers to Specification MIL-C-5809 or
equivalent.
(6) Fuses to Specification MIL-F-15160 or equivalent.
11-50. RESETTABLE CIRCUIT PRO-
TECTION DEVICES.
a. All resettable type circuit breakers
must open the circuit irrespective of the posi-
tion of the operating control when an overload
or circuit fault exists.  Such circuit breakers are
referred to as “trip free.”
b. Automatic reset circuit breakers, that
automatically reset themselves periodically, are
not recommended as circuit protection devices
for aircraft.
11-51. CIRCUIT 
BREAKER 
USAGE.
Circuit breakers are designed as circuit protec-
tion for the wire (see paragraph 11-48
and 11-49), not for protection of black boxes
AC 43.13-1B CHG 1
9/27/01
Page 11-16
Par 11-51
or components.  Use of a circuit  breaker as a
switch is not recommended.  Use of a circuit
breaker as a switch will decrease the life of the
circuit breaker.
11-52. CIRCUIT BREAKER MAINTE-
NANCE.  Circuit breakers should be periodi-
cally cycled with no load to enhance contact
performance by cleaning contaminants from
the contact surfaces.
11-53. SWITCHES.  In all circuits where a
switch malfunction can be hazardous, a switch
specifically designed for aircraft service should
be used.  These switches are of rugged con-
struction and have sufficient contact capacity
to break, make, and continuously carry the
connected load current.  The position of the
switch should be checked with an electrical
meter.
a. Electrical Switch Inspection.  Special
attention should be given to electrical circuit
switches, especially the spring-loaded type,
during the course of normal airworthiness in-
spection.  An internal failure of the spring-
loaded type may allow the switch to remain
closed even though the toggle or button returns
to the “off” position.  During inspection, at-
tention should also be given to the possibility
that improper switch substitution may have
been made.
(1) With the power off suspect aircraft
electrical switches should be checked in the
ON position for opens (high resistance) and in
The OFF position for shorts (low resistance),
with an ohmmeter.
(2) Any abnormal side to side move-
ment of the switch should be an alert to immi-
nent failure even if the switch tested was
shown to be acceptable with an ohmmeter.
b. Electromechanical Switches.
Switches have electrical contacts and various
types of switch actuators (i.e., toggle, plunger,
push-button, knob, rocker).
(1) Contacts designed for high-level
loads must not be subsequently used for low-
level applications, unless testing has been per-
formed to establish this capability.
(2) Switches are specifically selected
based on the design for the aircraft service cur-
rent ratings for lamp loads, inductive loads,
and motor loads and must be replaced with
identical make and model switches.
c. Proximity Switches.  These switches
are usually solid-state devices that detect the
presence of a predetermined target without
physical contact and are usually rated 0.5 amps
or less.
d. Switch Rating.  The nominal current
rating of the conventional aircraft switch is
usually stamped on the switch housing and
represents the continuous current rating with
the contacts closed.  Switches should be der-
ated from their nominal current rating for the
following types of circuits:
(1) Circuits 
containing 
incandescent
lamps can draw an initial current that is
15 times greater than the continuous current.
Contact burning or welding may occur when
the switch is closed.
(2) Inductive circuits have magnetic en-
ergy stored in solenoid or relay coils that is
released when the control switch is opened and
may appear as an arc.
(3) Direct-current motors will draw
several times their rated current during start-
ing, and magnetic energy stored in their
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 11-53
Page 11-17
armature and field coils is released when the
control switch is opened.
e. Switch Selection.  Switches for aircraft
use should be selected with extreme caution.
The contact ratings should be adequate for all
load conditions and applicable voltages, at
both sea level and the operational altitude.
Consideration should be given to the variation
in the electrical power characteristics, using
MIL-STD-704 as a guide.
f. Derating Factors.  Table 11-4 provides
an approximate method for derating nominal
ratings to obtain reasonable switch efficiency
and service life under reactive load conditions.
WARNING:  Do not use AC derated
switches in DC circuits.  AC switches
will not carry the same amperage as a
DC switch.
TABLE 11-4. Switch derating factors.
Nominal
System
Voltage
Type of Load
Derating
Factor
28 VDC
Lamp
8
28 VDC
Inductive (relay-solenoid)
4
28 VDC
Resistive (Heater)
2
28 VDC
Motor
3
12 VDC
Lamp
5
12 VDC
Inductive (relay-solenoid)
2
12 VDC
Resistive (Heater)
1
12 VDC
Motor
2
NOTES:
1.
To find the nominal rating of a switch required to operate
a given device, multiply the continuous current rating
of the device by the derating factor corresponding
to the voltage and type of load.
2.
To find the continuous rating that a switch of a
given nominal rating will handle efficiently,
divide the switch nominal rating by the derating
factor corresponding to the voltage and type of load.
g. Low Energy Loads.  Switches rated
for use at 28 VDC or more, and at 1.0 amp or
more, generally have silver contacts.  In gen-
eral, silver contacts should not be used to con-
trol devices which have either a voltage less
than 8 volts or a continuous current less than
0.5 amps unless the switch is specifically rated
for use with low-energy loads.  Table 11-5
provides general guidelines for selecting con-
tact materials for low-energy loads, but is not
applicable to hermetically sealed switches.
(1) Typical logic load devices have a
voltage of 0.5 volts to 28 volts and a continu-
ous current of less than 0.5 amps.  A suitable
method of rating switches for use on logic load
devices is specified in ANSI/EIA 5200000.
(General specification for special use electro-
mechanical switches of certified quality.)
TABLE 11-5. Selection of contact material.
NOTES:
1. If sulfide, moisture, or any form of contamination is
present, a sealed switch should be used.  The degree
of sealing required (environmental or hermetic) is de-
pendent upon the environment in which the switch is
intended to be operated.
2. If particle contamination in any form is likely to reach
the contacts, bifurcated contacts should be used.
3. Low-voltage high-current loads are difficult to predict
and may result in a combined tendency of noncontact,
sticking, and material transfer.
4. High-voltage high-current applications may require the
use of Silver Nickel contacts.
AC 43.13-1B CHG 1
9/27/01
Page 11-18
Par 11-53
(2) Typical low-level load devices have
a voltage of less than 0.5 volts and a continu-
ous current of less than 0.5 amps.  A suitable
method of rating switches for use on logic load
devices is specified in ANSI/EIA 5200000.
h. Shock and Vibration.
(1) Electromechanical switches (toggle
switches) are most susceptible to shock and
vibration in the plane that is parallel to contact
motion.  Under these conditions the switch
contacts 
may 
momentarily 
separate.
ANSI/EIA 5200000 specifies that contact
separations greater than 10 microseconds and
that closing of open contacts in excess of
1 microsecond are failures.  Repeated contact
separations during high levels of vibration or
shock may cause excessive electrical degrada-
tion of the contacts.  These separations can
also cause false signals to be registered by
electronic data processors without proper buff-
ering.
(2) Although proximity switches do not
have moving parts, the reliability of the inter-
nal electronic parts of the switch may be re-
duced.  Reliability and mean time between-
failure (MTBF) calculations should reflect the
applicable environment.  Note that the mount-
ing of both the proximity sensor and its target
must be rigid enough to withstand shock or vi-
bration to avoid creating false responses.
i. Electromagnetic/Radio Frequency In-
terference (EMI/RFI).
(1) DC 
operated 
electromechanical
switches are usually not susceptible to
EMI/RFI.  Proximity switches are susceptible
to an EMI/RFI environment and must be
evaluated in the application.  Twisting lead
wires, metal overbraids, lead wire routing, and
the design of the proximity switch can mini-
mize susceptibility.
(2) The arcing of electromechanical
switch contacts generates short duration
EMI/RFI when controlling highly inductive
electrical loads.  Twisting lead wires, metal
overbraids, and lead wire routing can reduce or
eliminate generation problems when dealing
with arcing loads.  Proximity sensors generally
use a relatively low-energy electromagnetic
field to sense the target.  Adequate spacing is
required to prevent interference between adja-
cent proximity sensors or other devices sus-
ceptible to EMI/RFI.  Refer to manufacturer’s
instructions.
b. Temperature.
(1) Electromechanical 
switches 
can
withstand wide temperature ranges and rapid
gradient shifts without damage.  Most aircraft
switches operate between -55 °C and 85 °C
with designs available from -185 °C to 260 °C
or more.  Higher temperatures require more
exotic materials, which can increase costs and
limit life.  It should be noted that o-ring seals
and elastomer boot seals tend to stiffen in ex-
treme cold.  This can increase operating forces
and reduce release forces or stop the switch
from releasing.
(2) Proximity sensors are normally de-
signed for environments from -55 °C to
125 °C.  During temperature excursions, the
operating and release points may shift from
5 percent to 10 percent.  Reliability of the
proximity sensor will typically be highest at
room temperature.  The reliability and MTBF
estimates should be reduced for use under high
temperatures or high thermal gradients.
c. Sealing.
NOTE:  The materials used for sealing
(o-rings, 
potting 
materials, 
etc.)
should be compatible with any air-
craft fluids to which the switch may be
exposed.
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 11-53
Page 11-19
(1) Electromechanical switches range in
sealing from partially sealed to hermetically
sealed.  Use a sealed switch when the switch
will be exposed to a dirty environment during
storage, assembly, or operation.  Use a higher
level of sealing when the switch will not have
an arcing load to self-clean the contacts.  Low-
energy loads tend to be more susceptible to
contamination.
(2) Proximity switches for aircraft ap-
plications typically have a metal face and pot-
ting material surrounding any electronics and
lead wire exits.  The potting material should be
compatible with the fluids the switch will be
exposed to in the environment.  The plastic
sensing face of some proximity switches may
be subject to absorption of water that may
cause the operating point to shift should be
protected.
d. Switch Installation.  Hazardous errors
in switch operation may be avoided by logical
and 
consistent 
installation. 
 
“On-off”
two-position switches should be mounted so
that the “on” position is reached by an upward
or forward movement of the toggle.  When the
switch controls movable aircraft elements,
such as landing gear or flaps, the toggle should
move in the same direction as the desired mo-
tion.  Inadvertent operation of switches can be
prevented by mounting suitable guards over
the switches.
11-48. RELAYS.  A relay is an electrically
controlled device that opens and closes electri-
cal contacts to effect the operation of other de-
vices in the same or in another electrical cir-
cuit.  The relay converts electrical energy into
mechanical energy through various means, and
through mechanical linkages, actuates electri-
cal conductors (contacts) that control electrical
circuits.  Solid-state relays may also be used in
electrical switching applications.
a. Use of Relays.  Most relays are used as
a switching device where a weight reduction
can be achieved, or to simplify electrical con-
trols.  It should be remembered that the relay is
an electrically operated switch, and therefore
subject to dropout under low system voltage
conditions.
b. Types of Connections.  Relays are
manufactured with various connective means
from mechanical to plug-in devices.  Installa-
tion procedures vary by the type of connection
and should be followed to ensure proper op-
eration of the relay.
c. Repair. Relays are complicated elec-
tromechanical assemblies and most are not re-
pairable.
d. Relay Selection.
(1) Contact ratings, as described on the
relay case, describe the make, carry, and break
capability for resistive currents only.  Consult
the appropriate specification to determine the
derating factor to use for other types of current
loads.  (Ref. MIL-PRF-39016, MIL-PRF-5757,
MIL-PRF-6016, MIL-PRF-835836.)
(2) Operating a relay at less than nomi-
nal coil voltage may compromise its perform-
ance and should never be done without written
manufacturer approval.
e. Relay Installation and Maintenance.
For installation and maintenance, care should
be taken to ensure proper placement of hard-
ware, especially at electrical connections.  The
use of properly calibrated torque wrenches and
following the manufacturer’s installation pro-
cedures is strongly recommended.  This is es-
pecially important with hermetically sealed
relays, since the glass-to-metal seal (used for
AC 43.13-1B CHG 1
9/27/01
Page 11-20
Par 11-54
insulation of the electrically “live” compo-
nents) is especially vulnerable to catastrophic
failure as a result of overtorquing.
(1) When replacing relays in alternating
current (ac) applications, it is essential to
maintain proper phase sequencing.  For any
application involving plug-in relays, proper
engagement of their retaining mechanism is
vital.
(2) The proximity of certain magneti-
cally permanent, magnet assisted, coil operated
relays may cause them to have an impact on
each other. Any manufacturer’s recommenda-
tions or precautions must be closely followed.
11-49. LOAD CONSIDERATIONS.
When switches or relays are to be used in ap-
plications where current or voltage is substan-
tially lower than rated conditions, additional
intermediate testing should be performed to
ensure reliable operation.  Contact the manu-
facturer on applications different from the
rated conditions.
11-50. OPERATING CONDITIONS FOR
SWITCHES AND RELAYS.  Switches and
relays should be compared to their specifica-
tion rating to ensure that all contacts are made
properly under all conditions of operation, in-
cluding vibration equivalent to that in the area
of the aircraft in which the switch or relay is to
be installed.
11-57.11-65. [RESERVED.]
9/27/01
AC 43.13-1B CHG 1
Par 11-66
Page 11-21
SECTION 5.  ELECTRICAL WIRE RATING
11-66. GENERAL.  Wires must b