
--- PAGE 1 ---
BGA Airworthiness Compendium 
Compendium of Airworthiness Directives, Mandatory Modifications, Special Inspections and Checklist of Defects 
Foreword and Instructions 
BGA Compendium – 11/10 
 
1 
 
FOREWORD 
The layout of the compendium is now listed under aircraft manufacturers name and is in a format to allow more room for detail and reference information. Where two 
manufacturers make one type, a cross reference is made. 
 
From 2002 each entry will have a status as follows: 
M 
Mandatory for aircraft with a BGA or EASA C of A  
R 
Recommended by the BGA or manufacturer 
O 
Optional (usually modifications) 
I 
For information (usually guidance for inspectors or general information)  
"In Service Reports (Advisory)" are for guidance to inspectors and owners spreading knowledge gained by BGA inspectors over many years of sailplane maintenance. These 
entries are not required inspections but for information and guidance only. 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
To research a particular aircraft, look under the following: 
1. Aircraft manufacturer section 
2. Engine and propeller section (if applicable) 
3. Equipment section 
4. General Information – All types 
5. Tug and Motor glider issues (if applicable) 
6. Review all TNS issued after the compendium issue date. 
 
 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
Compiled From: Airworthiness Directives (ADs), Service Bulletins (SBs), Tech Notes (TNs), Technical Instructions (TIs), Defect Reports, CAA Mandatory Modification and Inspection 
Summary, CAA Airworthiness Directives Vol. 1 & 2, CAA Foreign ADs Vol. III. CAA CAP 747 and EASA web site . Also experiences by BGA inspectors and operators.  Service Bulletins 
and Tech notes that are not supported by an AD and where they are easily obtained from the manufacturers will gradually be omitted from the compendium. 
 
Service Bulletins and Technical Notes: these should be reviewed at each C of A/Annual Check and assessed for compliance. Most of the larger manufacturers have a web site 
where service information can be downloaded. 
Amendments: will be identified with a line in the left margin 

--- PAGE 2 ---
BGA Airworthiness Compendium 
Compendium of Airworthiness Directives, Mandatory Modifications, Special Inspections and Checklist of Defects 
Foreword and Instructions 
BGA Compendium – 11/10 
 
2 
 
Tug’s:  The BGA compendium does NOT cover Glider Tug aircraft. Reference should be made to the applicable Airworthiness publications and manufacturers information. 
 
Updated:  by BGA Technical News Sheets (TNS) - bi-monthly. From 2002 the TNS number will be aligned with the compendium. I.e. 01/02/02 will become 02/02, 03/04/02 will 
become 04/02, 05/06/02 will become 06/02 and on. Indicating month and year of publication from 2006 TNS are numbers sequentially followed by the year. 
 
Compliance:  Unless stated otherwise, the AD’s listed in this compendium are mandatory for CAA & BGA registered gliders and Motor Gliders. 
Notes: 
1. AD’s are issued by EASA or National Airworthiness Authorities, generally to make manufacturers’ SB’s, TI's or Mods mandatory and to state time limits as to when they must 
be carried out. 
2. Items marked ”M” have been reviewed by the BGA and must be carried out as specified and entered in the log book Mods or Pink Pages section. 
3. All other entries listed in this compendium are for guidance to aid inspections, and it is recommended that they are carried out annually, i.e. at C of A, except when stated 
otherwise. From 2002 all entries will have a status indicator to assist inspectors to interpret the requirements. 
 
Club Technical Officers:  are asked to make all relevant airworthiness information available to club members and private owners.  
 
Club Committees: are reminded of their corporate responsibility to maintain high standards of airworthiness. 
 
BGA Inspectors:  are required to keep a record of their work, such as copies of 267 forms or a diary. 
 
CAA Airworthiness Notices:   detail repair and operational procedures for light aircraft, of which much is also applicable to gliders, is available from: - TSO Shop, PO Box 29, 
Norwich, NR3 1GN. Fax 0870 600 5522, Phone 0870 240 3701   Also available from CAA Airworthiness Notices 
 
EASA Publications: including CS-22 Glider design code, Part 21, Part M can be downloaded from the EASA web site  
 
Further Information:  The LBA publish AD’s on the Internet also many manufacturers have their own web sites (see contacts) where Tech Notes can be downloaded. There are 
many more Tech Notes than listed in the Compendium; these are mainly for optional modifications. For details either contact the agent or manufacturer direct. 
 
Errors:  Please notify the BGA, in writing by letter or e-mail if any errors are found in this publication.Email: BGA CTO 
