In determining the optimum effectiveness
of the compression plywood material,
it
is emphasized that the total load carried by the material would be approximately
limited to the buckling load rather than being proportional to the total load upon the
section.
If
it
is considered permissible for the subject panel to buckle at the design
load, the effective thickness for use in computing section properties may be taken as
approximately
t
\ —-\ (—Y defined in figure 3-24.
If
it remains unbuckled the cor-
\Fj\yJ
,E \
responding effective thickness may be taken as
t yj^
J.
The applicable procedure must
be checked by computing the actual stress in the plating and comparing
it with F Ccr
.
The resultant external applied loads on the section in question should be resolved into
(1)
Vertical shear (in plane of symmetry).
(2) Transverse shear (at reference point determined by
fig. 3-23).
(3) Moment about each of the principal section axes.
(4) Torque about reference
axis
(for example, the intersection with the plane of
symmetry of the transverse reference axis defined by fig. 3-23).
The plywood panels (sides, top, and bottom) can be considered to carry the shear upon
the section, both that due to the vertical and transverse loads and that resulting from
torsion. When the flange material is concentrated in the longerons, the shear intensity
(pounds per inch run) can be considered constant between adjacent flanges. The shear
intensity, and thus the shear stress, may then be determined by figure 3-23 without
the use of the shear center.
Such center may be determined,
if desired, by the methods
of reference 3-11.
Calculations made in connection with the application of the thin-shell
theory, developed primarily for use with isotropic metal materials, should be modified
to account for variations in the modulus of rigidity (G) for the various wood panels as
affected by wood species, direction of grain, relative thickness and arrangement of plies,
according to the methods described in chapter 2.
If the shell thickness, curvature, and frame spacing are such that the buckling
stresses will not be exceeded under conditions of maximum oading, the section properties
may be calculated usfhg the
full shell area as modified to correspond to equivalent
longeron material, that is, the proportionate amount of effective shell material, in terms
E
of longeron material,
is equal to — as previously described. When
the
section
prop.
E,
erties are thus calculated on the basis of longeron material, the bending stress in the
longerons is determined in the usual manner.
U=^
(3:59)
Where yi
is the distance of the longeron material from the neutral axis.
The bending
stress in the plywood material, however,
is determined as
(3:60)
Where yi is the distance of the subject material from the neutral axis.
The possible variety of assumptions made to facilitate analysis can be considerable
and
will,
to a large extent, be determined by the individual
details
of the problem
together with the designer's experience, judgment, and discretion.
An adequate sup-

--- PAGE 197 ---
METHODS OF STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS
191
plementary static-test program is required, and it is also essential that the assumptions
used in converting the test data into allowable loads and stresses be duplicated in the
stress analysis of the flight article.
3.42. Reinforced-Shell Type.
This type of construction
is very broad in nature
and covers the field extending from the longeron type with large longerons and thin
shell to the type approaching the pure shell, that is, small longitudinals and thick shell.
3.421. Stressed-skin fuselages.
Stressed-skin fuselages usually are structures of
the reinforced-shell, single-cell type, and the basic methods of wing analysis, as described
in section 3.13 generally can be applied directly to the analysis of such fuselage struc-
tures.
Due to variations of the type of loading and certain other structural problems,
however, it is considered advisable to review the fuselage analysis problem as a separate
subject.
Unless a fuselage of this nature conforms closely to a previously-constructed type,
the strength of which has been determined by test, a stress analysis
is not considered
as a sufficiently accurate means of determining its strength. The stress analysis should
be supplemented by pertinent
test data.
Whenever
possible,
it
is
desirable to
test
the entire fuselage for bending and torsion, but tests of certain component parts may
be acceptable in conjunction with a stress analysis.
3.422. Computation of bending stresses.
Prior to computing the bending stresses,
it
is necessary to compute the fuselage-section properties.
As was previously recom-
mended in section 3.13,
it
is considered advisable to make a sketch of the fuselage
section
considered.
This
sketch should indicate
all
of the material assumed
to be
effective.
Figure 3-25 is a sketch of a fuselage cross section of the subject type.
On the tension side of the fuselage the skin material may be assumed to be acting
as discussed in the following, while, on the compression side, only the effective width
of skin
(section 2.76) adjacent to the stiffener should be assumed to be acting.
In
general, the modulus of elasticity of the plywood plating will differ from that of the
stiffener material.
Account of this fact must be taken in calculating the section prop-
erties.
This may be done by converting the actual area of the plating on the tension
side into that of equivalent stiffener material, either in terms of equivalent thickness
or equivalent widths—the latter being somewhat analogous to the effective width as
used on the compression side.
The geometrical shape of the section contour together
with the arrangement and spacing of stiffener material
will dictate which method of
treatment
is analytically simpler or more accurate. The proportionate effectiveness of
E,
the
plating
material
in
tension may be taken
as — as
described
previously under
section
3.42.
E*
Proper account
for wood
species, plywood grain attitude and arrangement, and
veneer thicknesses should be taken into account according to the procedures described
under section 2.76. The determination of bending stresses by means of the
formula
implies the assumption
of plane
sections remaining plane
sections.
Hence,
the
cal-
culated stresses in the plating material, as based upon section properties determined
by conversion of plating material into equivalent stiffener material, must also be modified
E
in the ratio — . The resulting corrected stresses in the plating must be compared with

--- PAGE 198 ---
192
ANC BULLETIN—DESIGN OF WOOD AIRCRAFT STRUCTURES
ILLUSTRATING
TREATMENT OF MATERIAL
EFFECTIVE
IN 3 ENDING
A 30UT
X-X AXIS
Figure 3-25.—Reinforced shell fuselage.
the allowable
tensile
stresses
in the
plating material as described
in section 3.1383.
Such a check should always be made of plywood material adjacent to highly stressed
stiffener
material, even where the
contribution
of such plywood material has been
completely neglected in the determination of section properties.
In order to account
for the effect of shear on the effective widths for stiffeners on the side of the fuselage,
it
is advisable to compute the effective widths for all stiffeners on the compression side
on the basis of a panel edge stress corresponding to the allowable stress of the stiffener,
rather than the actual stress to which
it may be subjected.
It
is customary to assign
to each stiffener and adjacent skin an item number.
Prior to actual computations, the
designer should make an estimate of the neutral axis location, thereby dividing the
elements into those on the compression side and those on the tension side.
After the
location of the true centroid of the section has been determined, the designer will be
able to check the accuracy of his original assumptions as to neutral-axis location.
It usually will be found that no corrections for axis location are necessary
if the
final axis is located relatively close to the one originally assumed. A procedure similar to
that described in section 3.1330
will be found convenient for computing the section
properties.
Distances and moments originally are taken from some conveniently
lo-
cated reference axis. The sum of moments about the reference axis, after being divided
by the sum of the areas in the section, gives the location of the neutral axis of the sec-

--- PAGE 199 ---
METHODS OF STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS
193
tion.
Distances of the items from the neutral axis are then determined.
The sum of
the products of the areas located on either side of the neutral axis multiplied by the
distances to the neutral axis is equal to the static moment of the section about the neutral
axis, Q, and the sum of second moments of all of the elements of the section is equal to
the moment of inertia of the section,
I.
Where the
axial loads produce appreciable
values of bending moments on the fuselage, these moments should be included in the
bending moment, M, which is used to obtain the axial stresses due to bending.
Critical stresses commonly are assumed to occur at the
stiffeners located farthest
away from the neutral axis on the compressive side, and the stresses in these stiffeners
resulting from bending are computed by the
equation, M being the critical moment
at the section and y being the distance of the stiffener from the neutral axis.
Although the bending theory indicates that the outermost
fibers are the
critical
ones, it will often be found that stiffeners located near the top or bottom, on the shoulders
of the section, are the ones which are liable to fail during tests
if the skin buckles in
shear.
Such stiffeners usually are subjected to comparatively large direct stresses due
to bending and, at the same time, may act as the stiffeners of the tension-field shear
material transmitting the shearing stresses to the outermost
stiffeners.
Unless these
stiffeners are of sufficiently large proportions to
resist the bending loads imposed by
the tension-field
effects,
failures
of these
stiffeners may occur
at
loads smaller than
anticipated.
3.42 3. Computation of shearing stresses.
The
bending
material
in
fuselage
sections usually
is distributed
in such a manner that under symmetrical loadings
it
may be safely assumed that each side carries half of the vertical shear load, and the cor-
.
.
VQ
responding shearing stress, fs , at any point is equal to
, where V = the shear force act-
2tl
ing on the section, Q = static moment about the neutral axis of the areas located between
the outermost fibers and a horizontal line through the point under consideration, / =
moment of inertia of the section, and
/ = thickness of the skin at the point under con-
sideration.
The sum
value, Qx
(table
3-5),
should be used
for determining the maximum
shearing stresses that occur at the neutral axis of the fuselage.
Although these methods
pertain to the analysis of the fuselage for a shear load applied in a vertical direction,
similar methods can be employed for a shear load applied horizontally, such as a side
load on the vertical tail.
If the structure
is not too unsymmetrical about a horizontal
plane, the shear center for application of the horizontal load may be estimated, using
overlapping assumptions.
If a more exact
solution
of shear
distribution
is
desired,
the methods of section 3.135 may be used. The total shear stress (or intensity)
at any
section
is that obtained from the
superposition of
the component
shear stresses
(or
intensities) resulting from vertical loads, transverse loads, and torsion.
Although the fuselage structure as a whole should be checked for the shear distribu-
tion as determined in the foregoing,
it
is recommended that certain sections of the
fuselage be checked for other types of shear stress distribution that may be more in line
with the actual load application.
At the point of wing attachment to the fuselage, for
example, very large loads are transmitted to the fuselage frame through the attachment

--- PAGE 200 ---
194
ANC BULLETIN—DESIGN OF WOOD AIRCRAFT STRUCTURES
fitting.
It
is reasonable to assume that high shearing stresses will be present near this
fitting, gradually tapering to the extremity of the frame.
Although this assumption
is
not in agreement with the conventional bending theory,
it
is recommended that
it be
considered in design to allow for probable shear concentrations.
T
Torsional shear stresses can be computed by the conventional formula /„ =
%A t
and should be combined with the stresses due to direct shear. The tendency of tension
fields to sag the stiffeners also should be considered.
Because similarity seldom exists
between the geometric properties of different airplane structures,
it
is difficult to draw
conclusions from one
design as
to the allowable shear
stresses to be used for other
designs.
It is usually necessary, therefore, to conduct panel tests on representative curved
shear panels.
3.43. Pure-Shell Type. By definition, the pure shell or monocoque type of structure
incorporates no longitudinal stiffening members. Hence, the ultimate strength of such a
structure may be taken as the critical buckling strength of its elements.
As described
in chapter 2, the buckling strength of a plywood panel may be estimated from its thick-
ness, frame or
stiffener spacing, wood
species, arrangement of
plies, and curvature.
It
is generally desirable that no portion of the structure become buckled prior to the
application of the design load.
In such a case,
in. the calculation of section properties,
the material may be considered
fully effective and the stresses determined according
to the fundamentals of mechanics.
In a section such as shown in figure 3-26B, however, certain portions may become
buckled at low loads without materially affecting the final load-carrying capacity of the
total section.
This may be exemplified by the buckling of flat panels on the compres-
sion side while the major portion of the total flange material
is unbuckled by reason
of its difference in curvature or thickness.
It is generally satisfactorily conservative
to omit the buckled material from consideration.
Such, a partially buckled structure
must, of course, be adequately stiffened by frames.
3.431. Monocoque-shell fuselages.
The
basic
principles
of
the
design
of
thin-
walled cylinders, as discussed in ANC-5 sections 1.63 and 1.64 can be applied to the
design of monocoque fuselages. The monocoque portion of the fuselage structure usually
is restricted to certain sections of the fuselage, such as the tail portion.
In the center
and
in the forward portions of the fuselage, the reinforced-shell type of construction,
which is more suited to the region where cut-outs are present, generally is used.
Careful
attention should be given to that part of the fuselage structure where two types of con-
struction join.
Adequate length and attachment of the reinforcing members to the shell
should be provided.
At the points where the monocoque section stops at
cut-outs,
transfer of the load from monocoque portion to the stiffeners around the cut-out should
be investigated carefully.
(Ref . 3-19.
)
Tests of monocoque fuselages have demonstrated that the strength
is dependent
to some extent on the smoothness of the plating.
The designer should, therefore, be
certain that the methods of assembly of monocoque fuselages in the shop will produce
a satisfactory product. Where small margins of safety are present and when the effects of
load concentrations have not been taken into account conservatively, strength tests
should be carried
to the full ultimate-load values, because the type of
failure in this
type of structure usually
is elastic, and the appearance of the structure under proof

--- PAGE 201 ---
METHODS OF STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS
195
Y
A. UNBUCKLED
(FULLY EFFECTIVE)
UNBUCKLED
B.
PARTIALLY BUCKLED
Figure 3-26.—Pure shell-type fuselage.
load may be no indication of the ability of the structure to carry the required ultimate
loads.
3.44. Miscellaneous Fuselage Analysis Problems.
Each
new
type
of
fuselage
may present a new set of problems which has not occurred in other types.
It is recom-

--- PAGE 202 ---
196
ANC BULLETIN—DESIGN OF WOOD AIRCRAFT STRUCTURES
mended, therefore, that every new type of fuselage be tested at least to the critical ulti-
mate loads to determine the presence of possible stress concentrations and other effects
which could have been overlooked in the most careful design.
Some of the analysis
problems which are somewhat common to all types of fuselages are discussed in the fol-
lowing
sections.
3.441. Analysis of seams.
The allowable loads of the seams should be computed
and compared with the loads imposed by direct tensile stresses, by shear stresses, by any
tension field effects of the shear stresses, and by combined stresses due to the action of
all these stresses.
3.442. Analysis of frames and rings.
The analysis of the fuselage frames consti-
tutes a separate problem. Many manufacturers have adopted certain standard methods
of frame analysis, which, although not necessarily mathematically rigorous for the types
of the structures considered, have produced satisfactory designs. A general discussion
of some of these methods is given.
3.4421. Main frames.
Main frames are primarily for the purpose of distributing
into the fuselage such concentrated loads as the loads from wings,
tail
surfaces, or
landing gear, and those resulting from the local support of items of mass.
Main-frame
structures usually are of the redundant type and their analysis is based on the principles
of least work and related or equivalent methods such as strain energy, column analogy,
moment distribution, or joint relaxation (ref. 3-2 and 3-3).
Figures 3-27 A, B, and C show a fuselage main frame under a symmetrical loading
condition. The loads from the wing (or landing gear) are shown applied at the applicable
fittings and are resisted by shear forces in the fuselage skin. To agree with the elementary
bending theory, these shear intensities should be distributed so as to conform to the
or — values of the fuselage section, as applicable, giving a distribution of shear
forces of the type shown in figure 3-27 A or B.
Some designers take into account the
fact that, due to concentration of load where the frame is attached to the wing, the shear
is carried mostly by the adjacent fuselage skin and the shear resistance of the skin
is
reduced arbitrarily, somewhat in proportion to its distance from the point of concentrated
load application.
This would yield a shear force distribution of the type shown in figure
3-27 C.
In such cases, the fuselage skin should also be checked for the high stresses
indicated.
The
ordinary method of frame analysis
is
strictly applicable to frames the de-
flections of which are not restricted by the fuselage skin.
Actually, the frame deflections
may become quite pronounced and
the outward
deflections
are
resisted by double-
curvature effects in the fuselage skin or by the support of adjacent frames.
This action
of the skin
is equivalent to an introduction of inward-acting loads resisting the frame
bending and hence to a reduction of frame stresses to smaller values than those indicated
by an analysis based upon shear distributions as described. The present development of
the theory does not indicate quantitatively just what allowance can be made for this
reduction of stresses.
It is recommended, therefore, that the frame analysis be conducted
by the methods similar to the ones indicated.
Where
relatively deep frames
are used,
the moments induced by the wing
de-
flections may become important and should, therefore, be analyzed.

--- PAGE 203 ---
METHODS OF STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS
197
ft: * ^
IS
»U
<v ^
cj 5
>*- ^
^
*
9c
=c o ^
5r ^ ^
<m y>
^
—

--- PAGE 204 ---
198
ANC BULLETIN—DESIGN OF WOOD AIRCRAFT STRUCTURES
3.4422. Intermediate frames.
Intermediate frames are provided
to
preserve the
shape
of the
fuselage
structure, to reduce the column
length
of the
stiffeners, and
to prevent failure of the structure due to general instability.
They are subjected to
several types of loading; such
as, those due to tension
fields in the skin, to fuselage
bending, to transfer of shear to the fuselage plating. Many of these loads are compara-
tively small and often tend to balance each other.
For these reasons the design of
intermediate frames is often based on the experience of the designer or on semiempirical
methods.
In the case of large airplanes, however, it becomes of considerable importance
to design frames of this type to provide suitable stiffness for the prevention of general
instability.
3.443.
Effects of cut-outs.
Effects of cut-outs usually are allowed for by omitting
the bending material affected by the cut-out from the computation of the section prop-
erties.
For shearing stress computations in the location of regularly spaced cut-outs,
such as windows, the shear stress in the skin between cut-outs may be taken as equal
to that computed on the assumption that no cut-outs are present and then increasing
this value by the ratio of distance between cut-out centerlines to the distance between
the cut-outs.
Such treatment, although quite arbitrary, has served satisfactorily with
metal material.
Because of the inherent lack of ductility in wood and
its inability to
deform
plastically and redistribute
stresses adjacent to
local concentrations such as
cut-outs, the incorporation of large calculated margins of safety is recommended in such
locations.
In case of large openings, such as the cabin door cut-outs, allowance for bending
stress redistribution usually is made by modifying the section properties by omitting the
material affected by the cut-out.
For computation of the shearing stresses,
it may be
assumed that the direct shear load is carried through that side of the fuselage not con-
taining the cut-out.
The couple
resulting from
this unsymmetrical reaction in way
of the cut-out can be assumed to be resisted by a shear couple consisting of equal and
oppositely directed transverse reactions in the top and the bottom of the fuselage. The
redistribution of the shear
stress,
as assumed, can be achieved best
if bulkheads are
provided on both sides of the door.
Where only one main bulkhead
is provided
(at
only one end of the cut-out ) shear redistribution on the other side of the cut-out must
be accomplished by the frame under the flooring and by the intermediate frames.
Refer-
ence 3-19 describes the basic theory and recommended methods of determining the
shear distribution in the plating about cut-outs, and also the corresponding effect of the
cut-outs upon the loads in the stringers and frames.
3.444. Secondary structures within the fuselage.
Often the designer is faced with
the problem of existence of a secondary beam structure inside the main fuselage or hull
structure. This secondary structure may consist of keels or keelsons in a flying-boat hull,
or of the floor supporting structure or nose-wheel retracting tunnel in a fuselage.
If this
type of structure is analyzed separately under the specified local loads alone, the stress
distribution may not correspond to the distribution that will be obtained with it acting
in conjunction with the rest of the fuselage structure. The designer should make certain
that the combined effects of the two structures are in agreement and that the action of
the structure as a whole is consistent with expected deformations.
3.45. Strength Determination.
The strength
of the structure
is determined by
comparison of the calculated internal loads and stresses with the allowables obtained

--- PAGE 205 ---
METHODS OF STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS
199
either from tests or from the information given in chapter 2.
The determination of the
strength of shell structures, including reinforced shells,
is presented in detail in section
3.138.
3.5 HULLS AND FLOATS.
The analysis of hulls and floats may be treated in a
manner similar to that used with fuselage structures, the chief difference being in the
manner in which the major external loads are applied, that
is, by direct contact with
the water in the form of normal pressures.
Fundamentally,
hull and float structures
consist of
(1) Bottom plating—that, in contact with the water,
is loaded by the normal pres-
sures developed in landing, take-off, or buoyancy, and transfers such loads to the
(2) Bottom
stringers—that support
the
plating and
transfer the
plating
loading
to the supporting
(3 ) Frames—that in turn carry the water loads through to the
(4) Main longitudinal girder—or general structure.
Consideration
is given to the
fact that water causes concentrated
local loads on
float and hull bottoms that may
reach intensities considerably above the average loading and may be applied at different
times and for different durations to
different portions of the bottom structure.
For
these reasons the strength requirements for design of the bottom plating are specified
as more severe than those for stringer design.
The bottom stringer strength require-
ments are, in turn, more severe than those for complete frame design.
The specified
loads as applicable to the design of the general structure are in general of lesser local
intensities but are consistent with the design airplane accelerations and total reactions.
3.51. Main Longitudinal Girder.
This structure may consist of a centerline truss
or bulkhead girder to which the frames, deck, side and bottom plating are attached.
Or, the deck,
side, and bottom plating and stringers plus other longitudinal material
connecting to, and capable of acting with, the skin plating and stringers may be con-
sidered as a reinforced shell which comprises the longitudinal girder.
In such a structure
the frames not only serve to transmit the water loads to the general structure, but pro-
vide the transverse and circumferential stiffening for the shell. The effective longitudinal
members ordinarily considered to take the bending loads consist of: keel, bottom string-
ers,
keelson,
chine, deck, and stiffeners.
The effective shear material consists of side,
deck, and bottom plating. The analysis assumptions, calculation of section properties,
and determination of normal and shearing stresses applicable to the longitudinal girders
are in general as described under section 3.4 for fuselage analysis.
3.52. Bottom Plating. Thin plating, when subjected to sufficient normal pressures
will either rupture or deflect excessively and take a permanent set.
In hulls and floats
this latter effect is known as "wash boarding," and in an acceptable structure should not
be allowed to occur at loads below those corresponding to yield-point loads.
For this
reason the design criteria established by the procuring or certificating agency in general
consists of specification of certain design-bottom-pressure loadings in conjunction with
the permissible permanent deformations at the specified pressure loadings.
Permanent-
deformation is measured at the center of the plating panel, between stringers and relative
to the stringers, in a direction normal to the plane of the plating.
The analytical determination of bottom-plating stresses and deflections
is exceed-
ingly difficult of accurate attainment, and the problem of design calculation methods,
including the basis for allowable stresses, hence lends itself most readily to treatment by

--- PAGE 206 ---
200
ANC BULLETIN—DESIGN OE WOOD AIRCRAFT STRUCTURES
testing procedures.
Test panels representative of
(1) the plating species, thickness and
plywood type,
(2) the stringer spacing, frame spacing, and panel aspect ratio, and
(3)
method of edge support and type of edge restraint should be tested under normal pres-
sures, and the applicable strength
criteria (ultimate strength, arbitrary or true yield,
and permanent deformation) determined.
Test data may be interpreted and converted
in light of the calculation procedures described in chapter
2.
In such a treatment, two of the influential factors that determine the calculated
stresses and
deflections are
(1) type of edge support, and
(2) aspect ratio of panel.
Clamped or fixed edges assume the plating to be restrained from any rotation at the
edges, the neutral plane of the plywood maintaining zero slope.
In simply supported
edges, conversely, a possibility of rotation of the neutral plane of the plywood at the
edge
is implied.
The plates actually encountered in the design of floats and hulls
lie
somewhere between fixed and supported edges and may be considered as elastically
restrained. The maximum stress in a plate with fixed edges occurs at the long edges,
whereas it occurs in the middle of a plate with simply supported edges.
It follows from
this that a slight deflection or twist of the fixed edges of a plate will decrease the stress
close to the edges where it is a maximum and increase it near the middle where it was,
however, originally much less. Bottom stringers are not ordinarily very stiff torsionally
and constitute a type of support bordering upon the simply supported edge.
On the
other hand, keel, keelson, and chine members are necessarily quite stiff torsionally, as
well as laterally, in that they must be well gusseted to adjacent frames and, forming
the edge of the plate panels, must be stiff enough to prevent lateral deflections.
Hence,
the analytical treatment under both
limiting conditions of edge support should give
considerable guidance in design.
The ratio of frame spacing to stringer spacing ordinarily exceeds 3.0 and hence, the
aspect ratio of the plating panels for use in design can usually be taken as infinite.
3.5 3. Bottom Stringers.
As previously mentioned, the bottom stringers serve to
transfer the bottom plating normal loads to the transverse frames. They may be con-
sidered in general as continuous beams supported at the frames with a running load per
unit of length equal to the stringer spacing times the intensity of bottom pressure.
Under the ordinary conditions of uniform pressure, frame and stringer spacings, the
symmetry of loading would permit the consideration of the stringer as a uniformly loaded
continuous beam over fixed supports.
This would lead to a design bending moment in
the stringer:
where W = stringer transverse loading, in pounds per inch
and L = support spacing, in inches.
The extreme probability of loadings other than symmetrical and the
finitely
elastic
nature of the support restraint leads to the use of the more conservative specification
of the design bending moment as
(3:61)
10
(3:62)
When the conditions of loading are definitely different from these assumptions (that
is,
when the pressure varies, when the stringer is not continuous, or when the support has

--- PAGE 207 ---
METHODS OF STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS
201
unusual restraint characteristics) the stringer should of course, be designed to the local
conditions
specifically
applicable.
It is rational to consider a portion of the plating adjacent to a stringer as effectively
contributing to the section properties of the stringer.
It
is important that the same
assumptions as to plating effectiveness be used in converting test data into allowable
stresses as is used in the analysis of the flight article under the specified loads.
As
well
as being analyzed
for the
specified design bottom-pressure
loading,
the
plating and stringer combination should be checked for the conditions in which
it
is
both subjected to direct water loads and also forms a part of the effective flange material
of the general longitudinal girder structure.
In such conditions, the stresses resulting
from the bottom pressures consistent with the loadings on the general structure are
superimposed upon the stresses incurred as a portion of the flanges of the general structure.
3.54. Frames.
Hull and
float frame design
differs from ordinary fuselage frame
design principally in the nature of the applied loads which result from direct water
pressures.
Each frame is considered to take the bottom loadings applied to the plating
and stringer combination structure in the area adjacent to the frame.
Such loaded area
extends approximately one-half of the frame spacing to both sides.
The bottom loads
are usually transmitted from the stringers directly to the frame in the area between the
chines.
The assumptions as to the nature and magnitude of the balancing reactions in
the form of shear in the side and deck plating may be patterned after those used in
fuselage frame design.
In almost all instances, frame analysis involves the problem of the application of
the fundamental methods of least work and in this respect may be treated in a manner
similar to that employed with analogous fuselage frames.
The probability of unsym-
metrical loading applications on V-bottom hulls and floats in take-off and landing
is
quite high. For this reason the procuring or certificating agency specifies in all instances
certain unsymmetrical
design-loading
conditions.
Such
loading conditions are
often
critical for the design of frames, and hence the analysis of frames loaded in this manner
should be given the utmost care and consideration.
3.5 5. Strength Determination.
The strength
of the
structure
is determined by
comparison of the calculated internal loads and stresses with the allowables obtained
either from tests or from the information given in chapter 2. The determination of the
strength of shell structures, including reinforced shells,
is presented in detail in section
3.138.
3.6. MISCELLANEOUS.
Treatment of the wing, fuselage, hull,
tail, and control
surfaces does not complete the stress analysis of the airplane structure.
In airplanes of
wood construction, however,
it
is considered that these same structural components
constitute nearly all of those in which the use of wood is significant and in the analysis
of which the physical properties of wood will enter as an important factor.
Hence, for
such reasons and as explained in section 3.00, treatment of the detailed analysis problems
related to the remaining important airplane structural components will not be included
herein.
Such components would include, for example, landing gear, engine mount, con-
trol systems, fittings, and joints. The determination of the design load applied to each
individual wood structural element of a joint (mechanical joint or glue joint), or fitting
attachment, may be determined by basic principles of mechanics and machine design.
Where
it would significantly affect the distribution of the design load, the nonisotropic

--- PAGE 208 ---
202
ANC BULLETIN—DESIGN OF WOOD AIRCRAFT STRUCTURES
nature of wood, which results in the strength and elastic characteristics being dependent
upon the relation between the directions of the load and of the grain, should be taken
into account by a rational treatment or provided for by conservative arbitrary assump-
tions. The design load thus determined for such an element should be compared with
the allowable load defined by the applicable portions of chapter 2 