urved
to the shape of the wing, over each rib and applying pressure by tightening the screws.
The device is most suitable for assemblies in which the rib spacing is comparatively
large and the wing ribs heavy.
Several types of gluing jigs employing heat and sometimes fluid pressure are
being used to attach the skin to the framing members of wings and fuselages.
Cross
sections of two types, both utilizing fluid pressure and heat,
are shown in figures
5-61, B and C, and 5-62.
The jigs shown in 5-61, B, and 5-62 employ an extruded
rubber tube which exerts pressure and supplies heat from steam passing through
the tube.
Pure steam is used, and there is, hence, a definite relation between pressure
and temperature corresponding to that given in steam tables.
Ten pounds of steam
pressure at approximately 240° F. is reported to have been used to set a cold-setting,
urea-resin glue joint under a % 2-inch plywood skin in about 10 minutes.
The jig
illustrated in figure 5-61, C uses air pressure and an electrical strip heater.
This
arrangement provides individual control of pressure and temperature to any desired
level.
A strip-heater temperature of 200° F.
is reported to have been used to set a
cold-setting, urea-resin glue line beneath a % 2-meh plywood skin in about 12 minutes.
RABBETED JO/NT
A
B

--- PAGE 284 ---
278
ANC BULLETIN—WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
/JIG FRAME
CAUL STRIP
PLYWOOD SKIN
PLYWOOD SHIN.
METAL CLAMPING JIG
EXTRUDED RUBBER
TUBWG
A
AIR PRESSURE
IN THIS SPACE
HEAT RE5I5TANT
RUBBER SHEET
GLUED TO WOOD
Figure 5-61.—Devices for applying gluing pressure and heat in covering wings.
5.4714. Bag Pressure.
Another method of applying gluing pressure
to frame
assemblies involves the use of rubber bags and pressures that can be obtained by
drawing a vacuum on the bag.
In
this operation the
entire
skin, preformed
to
approximate shape,
is fastened lightly in place over the frame, the bearing surfaces
of which had been previously coated with glue.
A series
of
slats somewhat resem-
bling the arrangement in a roll-top desk is laid over the work, with the slats running
at
right angles to the wing ribs.
The entire assembly
is then inserted in a rubber
bag, the end closed, and a vacuum drawn on the bag.
Since the area of the bearing
surface of the ribs is small compared to the total area of the wing, the vacuum pres-
sure will be multiplied several times on the bearing surfaces of the ribs and the
amount of vacuum must be regulated accordingly.
Over the spars or other members
that are parallel to the slats, however, the pressure in pounds per square inch may
not exceed that indicated by the vacuum, and additional pressure from clamps out-
side the bag may be necessary on these areas.
The method is somewhat limited to
constructions in which most of the
framing members run in one direction and in
which the bearing area of the frame
is small compared to the total surface
area.

--- PAGE 285 ---
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
279
Figure 5-62.—Steam-heated pressure jig used to attach plywood skin to framing members.
PART OF STATIONARY JIG
XT
Plywood
WING NUT
{L005EN TO APPLY PRESSURE.
AT GLUE LINE)
CAUL BLOCK
'CALIBRATED
COMPRESSION
SPRING
5TIFFENER
GLUE LINE
BASE OF STATIONARY JIG
Figure
5-63.—Spring-loaded clamping device.

--- PAGE 286 ---
280
ANC BULLETIN—WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
i
In applying the method it is essential, in order to prevent depressing the skin between
ribs or other supports, that the slats be relatively
stiff.
5.4715. Precautions Against Uncontrolled Pressures and Heat.
In some special
secondary gluing operations it is necessary to guard against the application of high
uncontrolled pressures.
Small, softwood members can easily be crushed by excessive
pressure.
Figure 5-63 illustrates a means sometimes used
to apply controlled pres-
sure to such small parts, the force being applied by
releasing a compression spring.
This type of clamp has the further advantage that the pressure will be relatively un-
affected by a slight shrinkage of the wood due
to loss of moisture if the glue joint is
set rapidly by the application of heat.
All heated assembly-gluing jigs and special presses heated from one side only
should be carefully checked before use, and at definite periods thereafter, to guarantee
temperature conditions adequate
to
cure the
glue.
The most accurate and con-
venient method of making this check is to insert thermocouples in the glue lines in
question, being sure that the glue line farthest from the source of heat is checked.
5.4716. Pressure Period.
The gluing pressure should be maintained for at least
4 hours at ordinary room conditions
if cold-setting glues are being used.
The pres-
sure period may be decreased if equipment is available to raise the temperature during
the curing period.
If nail-strip gluing has been used and the nails are to be removed,
it is probably desirable to allow 6 hours at ordinary room conditions before the joints
are subjected to the stresses incident to removing the nails.
5.4717.
Final Conditioning.
After
the
skinning
operation
is
completed,
the
moisture added with the glue should be allowed to diffuse before the final sanding or
surfacing preparatory to applying finish.
Under normal room conditions, this will
require 2 to 3 days, but the process may be accelerated by moderate heat so that an
extended conditioning period may be unnecessary unless exceptional freedom from
irregularities is essential.
5.5. TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT.
5.50. General.
For the measurement of temperatures, such as room or wet-
and dry-bulb temperatures for humidity control, ordinary glass stem theremometers
of good quality are entirely satisfactory as indicating instruments.
The wick of a
wet-bulb thermometer should be moistened with clean water
(distilled
if available)
and whirled or held in a rapidly moving stream of air until the wet-bulb temperature
reading has become constant.
Wicks should be renewed before they become en-
crusted with mineral deposits.
Where room temperatures are
critical, recording instruments are useful in ad-
justing controllers and in providing a permanent record.
Various types are avail-
able, some of which can be moved from one department to another to check conditions
within short periods of time.
5.51. Thermocouples.
A number of temperature measurements can be made
most conveniently with thermocouples, which consist of fine wires of two different
metals, usually copper and constantan, for temperature measurements in processing-
wood.
Constantan
is a
special
alloy
of very stable
properties.
When a loop
is
made of two such wires and the junctions of the wires are at different temperatures,
an electromotive force
is set up in the loop which
is dependent upon the kinds of
metal used and
the
difference
in temperature between
the two
junctions.
Dif-
ferences in electromotive force, usually translated into a temperature scale, are ob-
tained by a convenient portable potentiometer.
Theimoeouplcs
aie
especially
useful
for making
temperature measurements
in places inaccessible
by other methods,
particularly
in glue
joints and the
like.
They may also be used to check temperatures in various parts of dry
kilns.
The
actual temperature measurement may be made at some distance from the point at
which the thermocouple
is located.
Leads from a number of thermocouples may
be brought to a central switchboard for reading
(fig. 5-64).

--- PAGE 287 ---
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
281
Figure 5-64.—Multiple switching arrangement for reading thermocouples.
The board may be enlarged to accommodate any
number of thermocouples.

--- PAGE 288 ---
282
AXC BULLETIN—WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
Thermocouple wire is made from metals now difficult to obtain and since wartime
uses of thermocouples have greatly increased, it is necessary to conserve the wire in every
possible way.
If a large number of thermocouples are to be read some distance away,
a single or common constantan lead may be used for the whole group.
Thermocouples
can be made of fine wire (No. 30 or somewhat finer) and may be cutoff and left in the
work without damage to woodworking tools or the mechanical strength of the parts
being made.
It may be obtained bare, enameled, or enameled and cotton covered.
Long leads may be avoided by the use of the thermocouple extension connection
shown in figure 5-65.
This device not only conserves thermocouple wire but affords
a rapid means of connecting the potentiometer to the thermocouple.
It has been
found advantageous to cement the two wires together by stretching 20 or 25 feet
or more of wire between two points and cementing them together with a rapid-setting
nitrocellulose glue such as ordinary household cement.
The cement
is placed in a
folded paper and the wires passed through the cement.
The wires are separated
for a short distance at the ends and then passed through a previously perforated
paper board as shown at A in figure 5-65 and twisted as shown at B.
C and D are
finished connections with the copper loop through the paper on one side and the con-
stantan on the
other.
The wire covering
is removed from
the exposed wire by
lightly filing.
A small wood pin
is placed under the exposed wire at T) merely to
give
it a little better elevation.
An ordinary spring clip
is used
to make the con-
nection as shown at E.
The thermocouple wire is carried out to the jaws of the clip,
wrapped closely around the ja ws which have been previously flattened and cemented
together with nitrocellulose cement.
After the cement has dried the inside faces
of the jaws are filed to expose the copper and constantan.
Both the connection and
clip should be marked so that the latter may be properly attached.
Since the wires
are directly connected no error can be introduced by handling the clip.
Most
portable
potentiometers
are
equipped
with
temperature-compensating
devices which make unnecessary
the
use
of a constant temperature
at
the
cold
junction.
The use of these instruments is not
difficult, but a few points should be
borne in mind by those who have not had experience with them.
1. The working voltage should be adjusted with the standard cell when measure-
ments are
to be made and thereafter at intervals frequent enough
to maintain
a,
uniform working voltage.
Instructions for making this adjustment usually accom-
pany the instrument.
2. The potentiometer should be used in a protected place where the surrounding
temperature will be as uniform as possible.
Radiant heat from hot presses, ovens,
or direct sunlight should be avoided since the compensating device may not function
accurately under such
conditions.
Likewise,
if an
instrument
is
taken from
a
location at one temperature to one at another temperature, the instrument should
be allowed to come to the approximate temperature of the space before
it is used.
3. The covering and enamel on the wire should be carefully removed where the
junction is to be made.
This can be done easily by holding the wire in a clamp and
pulling the ends through fine sandpaper, after which the wire ends should be wiped
clean and twisted tightly together.
For ordinary use the twisted tip will give a satis-
factory contact;
if the thermocouples are to be used a long time in an inaccessible
place, however, they should be dipped in hot solder to make a permanent contact.
A long twist is not necessary or desirable, as the temperature measured is that at the
point where the two metals first come in direct contact outside of the loop.
4. The thermocouple junction at which the temperature is to be measured should
be placed in a critical position in the work and the leads carried out to a point where
a connection can be made or to a central switch
if a large number of measurements
are to be made.
5. Only the kinds of wire and the calibration for which the potentiometer
is
designed should be used with
it.

--- PAGE 289 ---
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
283
Figure 5-65.—Thermocouple connection extension to provide a rapid means of making connections for temperature readings.
6. Where strip heaters are used the thermocouple junction should be in the glue
joint and so arranged that the wires will not come in contact with the strip heaters.
7.
Surface temperatures may be measured by recessing the thermocouple into
the surface and securing it in place by pressure or by means of a suitable adhesive.

--- PAGE 290 ---
284
ANC BULLETIN—WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
8. The use of jacks and clips of different metals from the thermocouple wire for
switching purposes will not introduce an error if both connections to the thermocouple
wire are at the same temperature.
If one end of a clip
is connected closely to
a
thermocouple wire in a heated part, however, an error in the temperature reading
will result.
5.6. MACHINING,
BENDING, AND OTHER WOODWORKING
OPER-
ATIONS.
5.60. General.
Among the important classes of properties that affect the general
utility
of any wood are
its machining properties, which embrace
all woodworking
operations.
In these, as in other classes of properties, different woods vary widely
and a given wood may give good results in some
operations,
fair in others, and
poor in
still others.
The "workability" of any wood, therefore, cannot be judged
by one operation, but depends rather upon the summation of all of them.
In any
operation there are several factors, both in the wood itself and in the machine, that
affect the results, and these results may be good or bad depending upon the condi-
tions under which the work was done.
Some woods machine well under a relatively
wide range of conditions, while others are handicapped by the need of exacting tech-
niques
if good results are to be obtained (5-31).
If the machining operation involves the preparation of a surface for gluing, the
stock should be conditioned
to
the proper moisture content for gluing before the
surface
is machined
(sec.
5.28).
The two pieces making up a scarf, for example,
should be as nearly as possible at the same moisture content at the time of gluing; a
variation of approximately 2 percent is the maximum permissible.
Any machining
that is done following gluing should be preceded by sufficient conditioning to obtain
a uniformly distributed moisture content
in the member that
will approximately
equal its average moisture content in service
(sec. 5.010).
Most of the machining operations required in fabricating aircraft parts can be
carried
out on equipment
that
is
readily
available
in wood-working
plants.
In
many instances, standard equipment can be used directly; in others,
it can readily
be adapted and supplemented by jigs and templates for the making of such parts as
spars, ribs, wing-tip bows, and the like.
Some operations, on the other hand, do require special procedures, either in the
way of specialized equipment or special techniques in manufacture.
Such operations
are described in greater detail in the following paragraphs, and emphasis
is placed
upon the points requiring particular attention.
5.61. Cutting Scarf Joints.
The use of some means of joining wood together to
form long, continuous members
in the grain direction
is necessary whenever the
length desired
is such that it exceeds that commercially available in a single piece,
or is desirable from the standpoint of using short lengths of otherwise good material.
This applies to either solid wood or plywood parts.
The most satisfactory means for accomplishing this purpose,
particularly for
solid wood,
is a properly made and glued scarf joint.
Scarf joints have been suc-
cessfully made at various slopes ranging from 20 to 1 to as steep as 8 to
1.
In general,
other conditions being equal, the steeper the slope the less waste in the cutting of the
scarf, but the more difficult
its gluing and the weaker the resulting joint.
5.62.
Scarfing Solid Stock.
The most important
single item involved
in the
making of a scarf joint is the machining of the scarf surface.
If the two scarf surfaces
have the proper slope and are smooth, true, and accurately fitted, the gluing can be
done without difficulty.
If the surfaces are not accurately fitted, joints of the quality
essential in aircraft cannot be expected.
The slope of the scarf may depend on how highly the part is stressed, but a slope
not steeper than
1
in 15 should be used for all stressed parts
(sec. 2.410).
The slope of grain with respect to the scarfed surfaces may be greatly increased
or decreased if the material to be spliced is cross-grained, depending on whether the

--- PAGE 291 ---
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
285
cut is made across or with the grain.
All scarf cuts should be made in the general
direction of the grain, as illustrated in figure 5-66, since the greater the angle the
grain makes with the scarf the more difficult the surface is to glue
(sec. 2.4111).
The laminations in the solid wood members of aircraft usually requiring scarf
joints are neither unusually thick nor wide; consequently, the scarfs can generally be
prepared on some standard woodworking machine by the use of special jigs.
Some
of the most commonly used methods are described here.
5.620.
Planer.
Figure 5-67 shows the cutting of a scarf joint on an ordinary
single-head cabinet planer.
As the stock passes through the planer it is guided and
held at the proper angle by a heavy, three-part supporting block, preferably made of
hardwood.
The central portion of the block is horizontal on the bottom, beveled on
the top to the desired slope, and is as wide as the material being scarfed.
To prevent
the stock from moving sidewise as
it passes through the planer, two
rails, equal in
height
to the greatest thickness of the beveled
central portion,
are bolted
to
it,
forming a channel with a sloping bed.
The bed of the planer is set low enough to allow the guide block barely to pass
through.
The material to be scarfed is laid on the beveled guide, as illustrated, and
fed through the planer.
By one or more
trips, depending upon the thickness of
the lamination and the power on the cutting head, an accurate scarf can be cut.
To
reduce the number of passes, the scarf may
first be sawed
to approximate shape
(sec. 5.625).
Any tendency of the stock to slide may be prevented by placing sand-
paper ,'rosin, or small metal spurs on the beveled surface of the jig.
The spurs may
A
INCORRECT
B
INCORRECT
C
CORRECT
Figure 5-66.— Consideration of grain direction when making scarfing laminations with cross grain, the slope of grain in the lamina-
tions being within the permissible limitations of specifications.
Arrows indicate grain direction.
simply be small nails partially driven and sharpened on the protruding end.
It
is
important to place the piece in such a manner that its end coincides with the end of
the sloping surface of the jig, so that the scarf may taper off to a feather edge.
It is
necessary to support the free ends of long pieces so that the work lies tightly against
the slope of the jig and does not bow up, causing the slope of the cut to change.
5.621. Shaper.
If the stock to be scarfed is less than 5 inches wide and not too
long, the operation may be carried out on a vertical spindle shaper equipped with
straight knives
(fig. 5-68).
In this instance, the jig is arranged so that the guide
runs against the collar of the shaper head and the piece being worked is held at the
desired angle to the path of travel.
The piece being scarfed is securely clamped to a
jig cut to a large radius of curvature to prevent lifting of the end of the piece.
As in
the planer operation, the final cut should be light, movement
(or slippage) of the
piece with relation to the jig should be avoided, the piece should be placed to taper
off to a feather edge, and the free ends of long pieces should be supported.
5.622. Jointer.
A hand-feed jointer having long tables may be used to produce
accurate scarfs when equipped with the proper
jig.
One suggested type of jig
is
shown in figure 5-69, A.
Here again it is important that the jig be equipped with
proper and adequate clamps to hold the piece firmly in place.
The scarf cut should
be made in at least two trips over the head, the final one being very light.
5.623. Tenoner.
On thin, but relatively wide, material it has been suggested
that a single-end tenoner may be quickly converted into a satisfactory machine for
568338—44
19

--- PAGE 292 ---
286
ANC BULLETIN—WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
Figure 5-67.—Cutting a scarf joint on an ordinary single-head cabinet planer.
APPROXIMATELY
30 FT RADIUS
Figure 5-68.—Scarfing operation on a vertical spindle shaper.

--- PAGE 293 ---
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
287
cutting scarf joints.
A sketch of this scheme is shown in figure 5-G9, B, as applied
to a tenoner having nontilting heads.
If the head can be set at an angle, the piece
may be held in a horizontal jig.
Tenoners of this type have heads not longer than
about 7 inches; therefore the maximum thickness of material on a 15 to 1 scarf would
be about three-eighths inch.
Since the travel of the cutters is across the grain of
the wood, considerable care is required to produce a surface of the requisite smooth-
ness.
The spiral knives with which tenoner heads are equipped are advantageous
in this respect.
A "back-up" block may be necessary to prevent splintering as the
knives leave the cut.
5.624.
Vertical Cutter-head Scarfing Machine.
A
special machine
for cutting
scarf joints on laminating stock
is illustrated
in figure
5-70.
The stock
is held
rigidly on a stationary vacuum bed while the cut is made with a high-speed traveling
THIS PART OF J/6
A
LOWER TENONER HEAD
B
Figure 5-69.—Scarfing.
A, jointer.
Stock is clamped on inclined jig and passed over jointer head.
Final pass is light, to produce
straight cut; B, single-end tenoner adapted with beveled jig and hold-down bar for scarfing.
cutter head.
The cutter head produces a scarf cut that resembles a smoothly sawn
surface.
5.62 5. Saws.
Scarf joints can, of course, be cut with saws, but to produce sawed
surfaces that will form a good joint requires unusually good equipment, maintenance,
and operation as well as careful inspection.
The degree of care required to produce
satisfactory gluing surfaces directly from a saw is not ordinarily maintained in pro-
duction operations, and the average sawed surface is likely to be "fuzzy" and rough,
with a considerable amount of torn fiber which tends to produce weak joints
(sec.
5.21).
Sawing of the final gluing surfaces should be avoided wherever possible.
5.63.
Scarfing Plywood.
Preparing scarf joints in plywood offers greater diffi-
culties than in solid wood because some of the plies run at right angles to the direction
of the cut.
The pieces are too wide for most planers and the cutting, consequently,
is usually done at right angles to the grain of the faces, adding to the difficulties of
feathering
off
the
scarf to
a fine
edge.
Scarf joints
in plywood accordingly
are
sometimes prepared with hand tools.
The scarf cut, which should have a slope not
steeper than
1 in 12, may be made with a plane, electric sander, sandpaper block, wide

--- PAGE 294 ---
288
ANC BULLETIN—WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
Figure 5-70.—Vertical cutter-head scarfing machine.
spokeshave, or scraper after first firmly clamping the plywood to a solid flat surface.
In thick plywood, the rough cut
is sometimes made with a table saw and the scarfed
surface finished by hand.
5.630. Hand Plane
Scarfing Device
for Thin Plywood and Veneer.
A hand
plane may be converted int o a manually operated scarfing tool by means of a suitable
guide as illustrated in figure 5-71, A.
For cutting across the grain, however,
it
is
necessary to grind a slight back-bevel on the blade as indicated in figure 5-71, B.
It is also important to grind a perfectly straight cutting edge at right angles to the
side of the blade instead of the customary slightly curved cutting edge.
This device
operates most
satisfactorily on
one-sixteenth-
to
one-eighth-inch plywood.
The
maximum length of scarf is limited by the width of the blade, and seldom exceeds
about 2% inches.
A shorter scarf may be made by the proper adjustment of depth
and angle of the blade
(a and b respectively in
fig. 5-71, A).
The metal guides
(c
of fig. 5-71, A) between which the plane operates prevent lateral movement.
5.631. Traveling Cutter-head Scarfing Machine.
One type of scarfing machine
which employs a traveling cutter head to cut scarfs on plywood panels
is shown in

--- PAGE 295 ---
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
289
figure 5-72.
This is not
a standard machine but was specially built, perhaps from
the parts
of a veneer
jointer,
to perform the scarfing operation.
The maximum
thickness of plywood which it will cut is determined by the length of the cutter head
and the minimum thickness by the effectiveness of the hold-downs.
These limits are
probably about three-fourths and one-sixteenth inch respectively.
5.632. Saw-scarfing Machines.
Another special scarfing machine in which alarge
heavy saw
T cuts the scarf is shown in figure 5-73, A.
This is also an adaptation of a
B
Figure 5-71.—Hand plane for scarfing thin plywood and veneer.
.1, arrangement for cutting a scarf; B, detail of cutting angle.
The hack-bevel of the plane hlade should make an angle of approximately 75° with the bed of the plane.
veneer jointer.
The limits of this machine are about the same as for the traveling
cutter-head machine, and the accuracy and smoothness
of the cut depend largely
upon effective hold-clowns and proper saw condition.
Frequent sharpening of the
saw and constant attention to the surfaces produced are necessary to assure satis-
factory surfaces for gluing.
A heavy-duty, slow-speed, vertical-spindle shaper can be converted into a satis-
factory scarfing machine for plywood as shown in the diagrammatic sketch, figure
5-73, B.
The knife collars are replaced by large stiffening collars for the saw.
By

--- PAGE 296 ---
290
ANC BULLETIN—WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
building an adequate sliding table of wood framing, the plywood can be guided past
the saw.
Adequate and effective hold-downs in front of and following the saw are
important in obtaining successful results from this machine.
Saws used for scarfing
should be of heavy gage and it is advisable to side-joint the teeth lightly to assure
smooth, uniformly cut surfaces.
5.633. Sander-drum Scarfing Machine for Thin Plywood and Veneer.
A
narrow
traveling sander drum can be used
for
scarfing plywood and veneer
(fig.
5-74).
When properly designed,
this type of machine
is capable of making accurate scarf
cuts on thin plywood and veneer at all angles of grain.
Machines of this type have
been used on plywood as thin as %
o inch and on plastic sheets Xoo inch to % 6 inch in
thickness.
The
practical upper limit
of thickness
is about
}i
inch.
The proper
grade of sandpaper to use depends on the thickness and species of wood or the type
of plastic sheet to be scarfed, but in general the thinner panels require finer paper.
HOLD-DOWN
Figure 5-72.—Traveling cutter-head scarfing machine.
In no case should felt or other soft back-up material be used on the drum under the
sandpaper, as such material tends to produce rounded edges and inaccurate scarfs.
The drum should be of some hard, stable material, such as metal or plastic.
The
use of any type of a sanding drum to make complete scarf cuts on relatively thick
panels is impractical because of the large amounts of material that must be removed
in the form of sander dust.
If most of the material
is removed by some type of
cutter head or saw, however, the finishing cut may be done accurately on a sanding
drum.
5.634. Sander-drum Scarfer for Veneer Strips.
Strips of thin veneer have been
scarfed by the use of a small diameter sanding drum and a movable clamping
jig,
as indicated in figure 5-75.
The accuracy of this type of cutting device depends on
the flatness of the veneer and the precision of the drum and the alinement guides.
5.635. Rotary Planer Scarfing Device.
Another scarfing device which in princi-
ple
is quite similar to figure 5-75
is shown in figure 5-76.
The veneer or plywood
being scarfed is passed under a small cutter head, sometimes called a "rotary planer."
To insure that the end of the piece being cut
is held down, an additional narrow
hold-down
is provided at the end.
The extension illustrated in figure 5-76, B,
is
usually left on to protect the feather edge until the piece is ready for gluing, when
it
is easily broken off by hand.
5.64. Routing of Spars.
Frequently,
solid or laminated spars are rectangular
in cross section, or are merely beveled top and bottom, but to reduce weight, may
be routed.
Three types of routed spars
(fig. 5-77)
are commonly employed:
a. Constant cross section, I or C in shape.
b. Constant depth, but routed in portions of the length
to form
I- or
C-shaped cross sections with full-width flanges.

--- PAGE 297 ---
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
291
HOLD-DOWN
BAR
PL YWOOD-
TABLE
MOVABLE Of? FIXED
VENEER -CUTTING
SAW
MOTOR MOUNTED ON
INCLINED CARRIAGE
MOVABL E OR FIXED
SANDER DRUM
PLYWOOD BED
TRACK,
Figure 5-74.—Sander-drum scarfing machine for thin plywood and veneer

--- PAGE 298 ---
292
ANC BULLETIN—WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
I
c. Variable depth, with or without webs partially cut away, as in
(6).
Type
(a)
is readily formed on a molder or shaper.
Types
(6) and
(c)
are,
conveniently formed on a router, with one bit of the proper profile for the
edges and another bit for removing the central portion of the cut-out.
5.65. Beveling and
Profiling
Spars, Spar Flanges, and
Similar
Parts.
During
manufacture, spars, spar flanges, and similar parts are made slightly oversize, and
SANDER DRUM
APPROXIMATELY/ 3~ IN DIAMETER AND IZ'lONC-
hl-avy Q
_
VENEER BEING SCARFED
Figure 5-75.—Sander-drum scarfer for veneer.
receive their finished shape—profile and bevels— in a final shaping operation which
leaves them ready for the assembly of ribs or other contiguous parts.
Two principal
methods are employed:
(1)
Part
stationary on
jig
table; cutting done by
tools moving along
edges.
(2)
Cutting tools stationary; part moved in frame past cutters.
5.650. Spar Profiling with Band Saw and Shaper.
The
method
in
which
the
jig table
is stationary
is applicable to spars of
all sizes, but
is especially useful for
.CHUCK Of DRILL PRESS
OR MILLING MACHINE
ROTARY PLANER
'OLD-DOWN
VENEER BEING
SC ARFED
01 OR LESS /N THICKNESS HERE
Detail of finished cut
Figure 5-76.—Rotary planer scarring machine for veneer and thin plywood.
large members which are heavy and awkward to handle.
These are clamped to a
rigid
stationary table whose top
is a template
of the shape required
to form the
profile of the spar.
Cutting is accomplished by band saw and shaper, as shown in figures 5-78 and
5-79.
In both instances the tool is carried by two wheels running on a rail, as shown
in the figures, and
is guided by a wheel or collar running against the edge of the
template.
The weight of the tool keeps it in position while the operator moves
it
forward.
An initial rough cut is made by the band saw, which cuts the profile and
bevels the edges to approximate shape.
The finishing cut is made by the shaper.
The amount of bevel imparted to the edge of the spar depends upon the tilt of
the cutting
tool, which in turn depends upon the lateral position of the
rail with
respect to the template.
If the rail is situated a generous distance below the level

--- PAGE 299 ---
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
293
Fiovrf 5-78.—Rough cutting profile and hovels on spar hy band saw moving on template table and rail.

--- PAGE 300 ---
294
ANC BULLETIN —WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
of the template, small deviations in its alinement have an inappreciable effect upon
the bevel.
Although
this idea has been developed principally for profiling and beveling
spars,
it
is evident that
it could be adapted to performing the same operations on
other parts, such as fuselage rings.
5.651. Contour Planing of Spar Flanges.
Spar flanges sometimes require ma-
chining to specially curved shapes on the surfaces to winch filler blocks and spacers
are later attached.
This operation can be accomplished quickly and accurately on a
specially built traveling-head contour planer.
One design
is shown in figure 5-80.
Figure 5-79.—Finish-cutting profile and bevels on spar by shaper moving on same template table and rail illustrated in figure 5-78.
The planer head passes lengthwise over the flange and cuts while moving in either
direction.
The supporting carriage rides on two straight ways, while the vertical
movement of the cutter head is controlled by a roller running on a third track, which
is contoured to produce the proper flange shape.
5.652. Spar Profiling on a Jointer.
Another method of spar profiling employs a
jointer and a frame in which the spar is carried across the jointer head, imparting the
proper bevel and profile to the top or bottom of the spar as it moves along.
The frame consists essentially of two track bars, two
fillers, end blocking, and
bolts.
The track bars are boards cut to the required shape and fitted with steel tracks
approximately
}i inch thick and 1 to 1 % inches wide.
Track bars are clamped against
the sides of the spar by bolts which pass through existing holes in the spar.
Tapered

--- PAGE 301 ---
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
295
fillers are placed between the spar and the track bars to maintain a constant distance
between tracks.
The method
is illustrated in figure 5-81, which shows the frame
assembled on the spar, sections through the assemblage at three points (fig. 5-81, B),
and the assemblage in position on the jointer.
Rollers or curved guide plates on which the steel tracks move are attached to the
frame of the machine.
Their height
is adjustable so that they can be raised
for
roughing cuts and then lowered to a stop for the final finishing cut.
In operation, the
profiling assemblage
is simply pushed from end to end past the jointer, which auto-
Figure 5-80.—Traveling-head contour planer.
matically cuts the proper bevels and tapers.
The final curved
cut
at "D"
is not
included, but is later formed by hand.
If for the final cut the guides are in a position concentric with the jointer head,
the cut will be correct regardless of whether the spar is kept approximately level.
With properly shaped and positioned track bars, constant or varying bevel can be
cut.
One set of track bars can be used to guide the cutting on both edges of the spar.
5.653. Shaping,
Beveling, and
Profiling of Ribs, Wing Frames, and Fuselage
Frames.
Edges of ribs must be machined
to produce the desired contour and
a
smooth, true surface* to which the skin may be fastened.
If the jigs and operating
conditions keep the parts well in line during the gluing of ribs, and if the structure is to
be fabric-covered, a simple sanding of the outer surfaces of the ribs may be sufficient.

--- PAGE 302 ---
296
ANC BULLETIN—WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
Figure 5 -81