(sec. 5.404),
but the natural tendency is to use more than is necessary, so that the main precaution
required
is to see that
all parts of the joint are covered.
Single spreading on the
gusset plate is adequate and most convenient.
Because of the nature of the opera-
tion,
the
assembly
period
is
short
and
requires
no
special
regulation
other
than training the operator to spread only a few plates before nailing.
The common
practice is to spread one gusset plate, nail it in place, then spread a second, nail it
in place, and so on; but, where desirable, a few plates can be spread and laid in place
in advance so long as the interval between spreading and nailing on any one plate
does not exceed 10 minutes.
When the gusset plates have been nailed and glued to
one side, the rib is removed from the jig and the gusset plates are nailed and glued to
the other side.
5.4401. Manual Pressure Gluing.
A second method, that of manual pressing,
has in some cases been adapted to the cold gluing of wing ribs, but the method
is
not recommended for general use because of the difficulties of insuring proper magni-
tude and distribution of gluing pressure and of maintaining proper limits on the
assembly period.
In this type of operation, a jig
is prepared for each size of rib.
The jig consists essentially of two metal plates about three-eighths inch thick, to
one of which short metal rods are attached—usually by threading the ends of the

--- PAGE 267 ---
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
261
Figure 5-43.—Jig for assembling and pressing several wing ribs in one operation.
rods and tapping the plates—in such positions that they hold the cap strips, braces,
and gusset plates in their proper position
(fig. 5-43).
Holes are bored in correspond-
ing positions in the upper plate.
Additional pressure rods, threaded at the top and
attached to the bottom plate, extend through the top plate when the jig
is loaded,
nuts are screwed on the threaded rods, and the gluing pressure is applied by tighten-
ing the nuts.
With this method, some care is required in locating the strain rods to
avoid unequal pressure distribution and localized crushing.
It
is advisable to use
a torque-indicating wrench to avoid excessive pressure.
The gluing pressure can also
be applied, of course, by external screws, clamps, or presses.
In operation, one set of gussets, cap strips, and braces after another
is spread
with glue and laid in place until the jig is full.
The top plate is then laid on and the

--- PAGE 268 ---
262
ANC BULLETIN—WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
gluing pressure applied.
It
is advisable to lay a caul of thin plywood upon each
rib to promote uniform distribution of pressure and a sheet of waxed paper on each
side of each rib to prevent excess glue from causing the ribs to stick together or to
the cauls.
The principal disadvantage of this system
is the danger of exceeding the allow-
able assembly period.
The assembly periods should not exceed 20 minutes and the
gluing pressures should be between 100 and 200 pounds per square inch, depending
on the species used.
Some difficulties are likely to be encountered when this system
of rib gluing
is
first
tried.
For larger ribs, the forms are heavy and mechanical
lifting hoists may be desirable.
Loading the jig
is not a rapid process; hence, the
number of ribs that can be laid up at one time in one jig will be limited by the per-
missible assembly period of 20 minutes from the time spreading starts on the first
rib until gluing pressure
is applied.
If the gusset plates are continuous strips, 10
to 15 ribs of medium size can be laid within the time limit, but,
if the gussets are in
the form of small patches, the number of ribs per jig will be considerably reduced.
After the ribs are removed from the press, they should be conditioned before
final machining for 2
to 3 days at room temperatures, or
1 day at 120° F. with
humidity control.
5.441. Hot-press Gluing.
Gussets
are
often glued
to
cap
strips
in
a
rapid-
closing hot press.
To carry out this operation, a jig is made of comparatively thin
metal (approximately one-sixteenth inch) equipped with thin metal angles welded
to one surface to hold the ribs, braces, and gussets in their proper positions.
The
height of these angles must be somewhat less than the sum of the thicknesses of the
cap strips and the gusset plates, so that the gluing pressure will be exerted on the
joint and not on the guide blocks.
5.4410. Gluing.
In the gluing operation, the gusset plates for one side of the
rib are coated with glue and laid in place, the cap strips and braces are inserted in
their proper places, and the top gusset plates are spread with glue, laid
in place,
and—since they may extend well above the guide blocks—fastened lightly with a
few nails.
The assembly
is then placed in a hot press, where the gluing operation
is completed under heat and pressure.
5.4411. Glues.
Synthetic-resin glues are best suited for this type of operation,
the choice between the different types depending somewhat on the hot-press equip-
ment available.
Hot-press urea, fortified urea, phenol, and melamine-formaldehyde
glues can be used in single or multi-opening hot presses of conventional design (figs.
5-14 and 5-44).
The low-temperature, phenol-formaldehyde glues, which do not
cure at ordinary room temperatures, and the cold-setting urea resins are also adapted
for use
in hot presses.
There
is great danger of precuring when low-temperature
and cold-setting resin glues are used in hot presses.
If the press is slow in closing,
either because of delay by the operator or because of a slow-closing mechanism,
the glue may set before the pressure is applied, and faulty joints will result.
Quick-
closing, single-opening hot presses
(fig. 5-44) are best adapted for use with low-tem-
perature and
ccld-setting resin
glues.
Although casein glues can be used
in
hot
presses, they do not set as rapidly and are not as well adapted for hot-pressing opera-
tions as are the resin glues.
With the hot-setting resin glues,
the temperature of the platens may well be
that used in the conventional gluing of hot-pressed plywood
(sec. 5.263).
The rate
of setting of the low-temperature phenol and cold-setting, urea-resin glues
is
dis-
cussed in section
5.263.
With the cold-setting, urea-resin glues in particular, the
recommendations of the glue manufacturer on maximum permissible temperature
should be observed and tests made to confirm the quality of the resulting bond.
In
all hot-press gluing, the metal jigs must be cooled between operations or the glue on
the lower gusset plate may cure while the rib is being assembled.

--- PAGE 269 ---
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
263
Figure 5-44.—Quick -closing, lire-hose hot press for assembling ribs and similar small parts.
5.4412. Pressure.
The gluing
pressure should be
calculated on the basis of
the area of the glue joint and should conform to previous recommendations for the
glues used.
5.4413. Final Conditioning.
During the gluing operation, moisture will be lost,
and the ribs should therefore be allowed to condition before the
final machining
operation.
In contrast to cold pressing, the conditioning involves a regain rather
than a loss of moisture.
This increase in moisture content can best be accomplished
in a kiln at elevated temperatures and humidity adjusted to an equilibrium moisture
content of about 10 percent.
Conditioning in an ordinary shop without adequate
humidity control during the winter will be slow and unsatisfactory.
5.45. Assembly of Box Spars.
The
assembly
gluing
of box
spars
consists
of
gluing the filler or reinforcing blocks between the flanges and gluing plywood webs
to the sides.
In most cases, the grain of the reinforcing block
is perpendicular to
that of the spar flange.
In other cases,
it is at an angle of as much as 60°.
If the
filler blocks are of plywood, the grain of approximately half the plies will run at right
angles to that of the spar flanges and, on this portion of the surface, end grain will
be glued to side grain.
If the grain of the filler blocks is perpendicular to the flange,
or nearly so, the recommendations for the gluing of scarf-joint surfaces should be

--- PAGE 270 ---
264
ANC BULLETIN—WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
followed.
In particular, the glue mixture should be thickened and the maximum
pressures permitted by the species should be used
(sees. 5.271 and 5.4101).
5.450. Glues.
The choice
of glues for gluing both the
filler blocks and the
web
is usually limited to those of the cold-setting type.
In some cases
it may be
possible to glue the web to the flanges in a hot press, and in such cases a hot-setting
resin can be used.
The use of hot-press glues, however, will be limited to those cases
where the web is thin.
5.45 1. Pressure.
In calculating the gluing pressure, the area of contact between
the
filler blocks and the spar flanges or between the web and the
filler blocks and
flanges should be considered rather than the total surface area.
The width of the
filler blocks should equal that of the flanges.
In gluing, the blocks should be care-
fully aligned with the surfaces of the spar flanges to minimize the surfacing necessary
Figure 5-45.—Jig for positioning and gluing filler blocks to spar flanges in a spar of complex design.
before gluing on the webs.
The time under pressure should not be less than 4 hours
at ordinary room temperatures, and the assembly should be allowed to condition
3 to 5 clays at room temperatures before preparing the surface for gluing to the web.
5.452.
Filler Blocks.
In gluing the
filler blocks of a box spar, the method of
applying the pressure will vary with the design of the spar.
Filler blocks of simple
design in small spars may be glued in place with hand clamps, provided that a
sufficient number of clamps is used to obtain adequate pressure
(sec. 5.251 and table
5-13).
Filler blocks can be glued in larger spars by the use
of cauls and screw
presses (fig. 5-37).
If the job involves large numbers of complex spars, special jigs are desirable
to assist in proper alignment of the filler blocks and in convenient application of the
gluing pressure.
One such type of special
jig
is
illustrated in figure
5-45.
The
location of each
filler block is indicated by a diagram or by mechanical stops on the
plate upon which the flanges and blocks are placed.
One spar cap
rests
against
a rigid metal caul plate
; the opposite cap is laid against a movable caul plate that may
be of wood or metal.
In this design, a fire hose
is laid between the movable caul

--- PAGE 271 ---
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
265
plate and a rigid supporting member.
When the filler blocks have been surfaced to
fit and spread with glue they are laid in place and the gluing pressure applied by
admitting air into the hose.
The pressure could also be applied by screws through
the fixed support bearing against the movable caul board, or by levers that actuate
eccentrics.
Applying
air pressure through hose, however, has the advantage that
the pressure is uniform and is easily measured.
5.453. Gluing Webs. Gluing
of
the webs
to
the
flanges and
filler blocks can
ordinarily be done most conveniently in a conventional screw-type press
(fig. 5-35).
As mentioned previously,
this gluing might be done in a hot press in special cases.
Figure 5-46.—Specially designed, steam-heated hot press used to glue plywood to framing.
Specially designed steam or electrically heated fire-hose presses are sometimes used
for this purpose. A large steam heated press of this type is illustrated in figure 5-46.
5.454. Final Conditioning.
After removal fiom the press, the completed spar
should be allowed to condition at least 2 days before initial machining and from 3 to
5 days at room temperatures before final surfacing.
5.45 5.
Interior Finish.
Gluing
the
interior
surfaces
of
the
flanges and
filler
blocks involves masking or otherwise protecting the glue-line area previous to the
finishing, as described in section 5.7.
5.46. Assembly of Wing and Fuselage Frames.
5.460. Fabric-covered Wing Frames.
The
ribs
for
fabric-covered wing frames
are often made in one unit that includes the leading edge, center section, and trailing
edge.
The cap strips are continuous and extend acioss the top and bottom of the

--- PAGE 272 ---
266
ANC BULLETIN—WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
Figure 5-47..—Assembling wing ribs and spars.

--- PAGE 273 ---
I
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
267
spar.
Attaching ribs of such design to the spars offers no particular difficulty and
requires no elaborate jig.
Ordinarily, the ribs are slipped over the ends of the spar,
properly held by simple positioning jigs, and glued in place
(fig. 5-47).
The gluing
pressure is ordinarily applied by small nails.
5.4600. Reinforcing Blocks.
The joint between the rib and the spar
is some-
times reinforced by corner blocks or by small plywood
angles,
as
in figure
5-48.
Solid reinforcing members are usually glued in place by nail gluing, although the
pressure could be applied with hand clamps.
Plywood angles can be glued in place
Fir.wKE 5-48.— Reinforcements for the joints between the wing ribs and spars: A, plywood angles; B, triangular, solid-wood blocks;
C, hand clamp for gluing plywood angles in place.
by special clamping devices.
A suitable clamp for gluing four angles in place in
one operation
is illustrated in figure 5-48, C.
5.4601. Machining.
For a wing that
is
to be covered with
fabric
only, the
amount of machining to true the surfaces after the ribs are in place will be limited.
If the wing
is covered with fabric over a partial covering of plywood
(fig.
5-49),
more surfacing
will be required
to form a smooth junction between the ribs and
plywood-covered areas.
5. 461. Plywood-covered Wing Frames.
Ribs in wings that are covered with
plywood are often in three sections, the leading-edge section, the trailing-edge section,
and the section between the front and rear spar.
In this case, more elaborate jigs are
required
to locate the ribs in the proper position and
to hold them at the correct
angle while they are being glued in place.
Frequently the ribs for the leading edge
are fastened
in position
first
(fig.
5-50), usually by nail gluing them
to the spar.
The plywood cover
is frequently attached to the leading edge in the same jig as

--- PAGE 274 ---
268
ANC BULLETIN—WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
soon as the leading-edge
ribs have been glued in place and surfaced
(usually by
floating
(sec.
5.658)
)
to insure a good contact surface.
The spar, complete with
leading edge,
is then transferred
to another
jig where tbe center-section ribs are
attached between front and rear spar.
For the most part, these ribs, like the lead-
ing-edge
ribs,
are
nail glued in place.
The joints are sometimes reinforced with
blocking or with plywood angles, and sometimes with a strip of plywood glued to
the surface of the spar flange and extending over a portion of the ribs
(fig. 5-51).
Ribs in the center section of a three-piece wing are frequently heavy and de-
signed to carry high
stresses.
These
ribs likewise are often fastened in place by
Figure 5-49.—Assembling a wing that is to be covered with fabric over a partial covering of plywood.
nail gluing, with or without reinforcing blocks or angles, but occasionally they are
bolted to the spars.
The jigs for holding the structure in place while the ribs and
other parts of the structure are attached are often large and complex.
On the other extreme, the ribs for the trailing-edge section and of the control
surfaces
are usually small and
light and require only simple
jigs
to
insure
their
proper positioning.
Nail gluing
is used almost exclusively in fastening the ribs in
position in these small assemblies.
5.4610. Glues.
The choice of glues for use in assembling the wing frames
is
limited to those of the cold-setting types except in those cases where it
is possible
to accomplish setting by the application of heat.
5.4611. Glue Spread.
The amount of glue spread should conform
to recom-
mendations
(sec.
5.403).
Tbe natural tendency of the workmen will be to spread

--- PAGE 275 ---
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
269
more than is necessary on the small surfaces involved, so the only precaution neces-
sary is to see that all parts of the contact surfaces are covered.
5.4612.
Pressure.
Where clamps can be used, pressures of approximately 150
pounds per square inch are advisable.
If the joints are nail glued, the size of the
nails and nail spacing
will vary with the size of the members.
One row of nails
for each one-half inch in width
is suggested, with a nail spacing of approximately
1 inch in each row and the nails in each row staggered with respect to those in ad-
Ficure 5-50.—Jigs for locating leading-edge ribs in proper positions.
jacent rows.
The length of the
nails should be such
as
to reach
at least three-
eighths inch into the wood beneath the joint.
5.4613. Pressure Period.
If clamps are used, the joints should remain under
pressure for at least 4 hours at 75° F.
It
is assumed that,
if nails are used, they
will be left in place and that the assembly will be so handled that the joints will not
be disturbed before the glue has
set.
Banks of infrared lamps or kilns are some-
times used to accelerate the cure of joints in frame assembly.
When either method
is used, certain precautions should be observed.
The temperature should not be
sufficient to damage either the glue or the wood and the relative humidity should
be regulated to minimize drying and consequent changes in dimension during the
curing
period.
Tests should be made
to
substantiate
the
quality
of
the
joints
produced.
568338—44
18

--- PAGE 276 ---
270
ANC BULLETIN—WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
5.4614.
Final Conditioning.
The
conditioning
period
following
gluing
of
about 2 days at ordinary conditions
is sufficient to permit the joints to reach ap-
proximately maximum strength.
A longer conditioning period to permit complete
diffusion of moisture away from the glue joint is not necessary.
Fk.uke 5-51.—Ribs in place between front and rear spars of wing section.
5.462. Assembly of the Fuselage Frame.
Assembling
the
fuselage
frame
con-
sists essentially
in holding the bulkhead or fuselage rings in proper position while
the
longerons
are being
fastened
in
place.
The
rings may be laminated
stock
(sec.
5.68);
flat plywood formed from panels
of sufficient
thickness; or combina-
Figure 5-52.—External type jig for assembling fuselage frames.
tions of solid wood, plywood, and laminated
stock.
Larger fuselage rings may be
of box-section construction.
5.4620. Jigs.
The jigs used for supporting the fuselage rings are usually of two
types, external and internal.
The external type is essentially a frame enclosing the
fuselage with stops or blocks at the proper positions to which the fuselage rings are
clamped
(fig. 5-52).
With an external jig of this type only a part of the fuselage

--- PAGE 277 ---
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
271
covering can be attached at one time,
so that a second
jig
is necessary when the
fuselage advances to the final covering operation.
With the internal type of jig for
assembling
the
fuselage
rings,
a
rigid and
comparatively
large member extends
longitudinally through the fuselage frame.
Rigid arms radiate from
this
central
member at the proper locations to which the fuselage rings are clamped
(fig. 5-53).
If other considerations permit the use of the internal type of jig,
it has the advantage
of leaving the surface free to apply the entire covering without changing jigs.
In fuselage designs where the longerons are
let into the different fuselage rings
at varying angles, the
slots in the rings are sometimes cut oversize and squarely
across to eliminate the necessity of setting up special jigs for slotting each ring and
to facilitate laying the longerons in place.
The triangular spaces remaining are then
filled with small wedges coated with glue and driven in place.
5.4621. Gluing.
The choice of glues for this work is limited to those of the cold-
setting types.
The spread should conform to previous recommendations for the type
Figure 5-53.—Internal type jig for assembling fuselage frames.
selected.
The general tendency, however, will be to spread an excess so that the
main precaution to be observed
is to insure that
all parts of the contact areas are
completely covered.
If the fuselage rings are of plywood, a part of the gluing will be
end grain to side grain.
If the contacting surfaces are not side grain to side grain,
the practices recommended for the gluing of end-grain surfaces should be observed
(sec. 5.271).
5.4622.
Pressure.
In many operations,
it is customary to fasten the longerons
to the rings with screws that serve also to apply the gluing pressure.
Frequently
the joints will be in positions where clamps can be used and, wherever practical, their
use is recommended.
5.4623. Conditioning Period.
A conditioning period
for the glue joints that
greatly exceeds the time required to gain approximately the full strength of the glue
is unnecessary; about 2 days at room temperatures is considered sufficient.
5.47. Application of Plywood Skins.
Though cold-setting glues are largely used
to attach plywood skins to the wings, fuselage, or control surfaces, it may sometimes
be practical to use glues that require elevated temperatures for small assemblies that
can be glued up and then moved into kilns where temperature and humidity can be
regulated.
The kiln procedure can also be employed to accelerate the curing of the
cold-setting resin
glues, which
set more slowly
at customary room temperatures.

--- PAGE 278 ---
272
ANC BULLETIN—WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
Lamps have been used to accelerate the curing of the glue, but the advantage of their
use is often open to question because of the relatively slow rate of heat transfer and
the difficulty of obtaining proper humidification around the assembly.
Resistance
heaters applied as strips between the skin and nailing strips sometimes prove useful
over limited areas where rapid curing of one joint may accelerate the assembly of a
large unit.
The surfaces of the wing ribs, spars, and braces in the wing surface or of the
fuselage rings, longerons, and braces in the fuselage surface should be true, smooth,
Figure 5-54.—Attaching flat plywood to the leading edge of a wing section.
and in alignment when the skin
is attached.
A common method of preparing the
surfaces of the framing members is "floating"
(sec. 5.658).
It
is desirable
to prepare
jigs
to hold the wing or fuselage frames rigidly in
position during the surfacing of the frame and attaching of the skin.
The complexity
of the jigs will vary, depending on the size of the assemblies and the method of apply-
ing the gluing pressures.
If the gluing pressure
is to be applied by nails and if the
assembly
is small, the jig may consist of merely the simplest support for the work
(fig. 5-54).
As the size of the assembly increases, the size of the jig must, of course,
be increased.
5.470. Preparing the Skin.
Before the actual operation of gluing the plywood
to the frame begins, the plywood skin itself must be prepared for gluing.
In some
cases this may consist of merely cutting the plywood to size.
Usually it will involve
splicing two or more sheets in order to obtain the proper length.
Plywood panels are

--- PAGE 279 ---
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
273
ordinarily spliced by joining with scarf joints in separate gluing operations, although
splicing with scarf joints may be done as a part of the operation of laying the skin.
In either case, the precautions as to slope of scarf, gluing, and pressing that have been
discussed previously should be observed
(sec. 5.4102).
The amount of curvature may be so great that flat plywood sheets cannot be
conveniently bent
to the required shape during the operation
of laying
the skin
(see. 5.683).
In such cases it will be found desirable to bend or preform the plywood
sheet to approximately the desired shape before attaching it to the frame.
In some
cases
it may be necessary to use shells of molded plywood rather than to attempt to
bend a flat piece to the desired shape.
Occasionally the surface of the plywood may be glazed, show bleed-through of
glue,
or
possess
other
characteristics
that make
it
difficult
to
glue
(sec.
5.27).
Ordinarily these conditions can be remedied most easily by light sanding.
The use
of a paper no coarser than a No. 4-0 garnet
is recommended for low-density species
and no coarser than No. 3-0 garnet for high-density species.
Oidy a small amount
of the surface, usually not more than 0.001 inch, needs to be removed, and in no case
should the sanding decrease the thickness of the face ply by more than 10 percent.
If the aircraft manufacturer encounters trouble in secondary gluing to plywood sur-
faces, the subject should be considered with the plywood manufacturer and efforts
made to eliminate the trouble at the source.
5.471. Attaching the Skin.
It is important that
all details be planned and ar-
ranged carefully in advance to avoid the danger of exceeding permissible assembly
limits of the glue used.
5.4710. Glue Spread.
The glue usually is spread on the contact surfaces of the
frame and occasionally on both surfaces.
Ordinarily, the spreading is done by hand
and the natural tendency is to spread more glue than necessary, so that the main
precaution
is to insure that
all surfaces
are covered.
Overspreading, however,
is
not good practice because
it
results in excessive squeeze-out, which may later be
loosened and plug drain holes or grommets.
5.4711. Assembly Time.
The interval between the start
of the spreading op-
eration and the complete application of the gluing pressure should conform to pre-
vious recommendations
(sees. 5.24 and 5.404).
In applying the skins to the larger
assemblies for the first time, it may prove difficult to keep within these limits.
This
emphasizes the need for careful planning and suggests the training of crews on smaller
assemblies before moving them to the larger and more complex units.
5.4712. Application of Pressure.
The
simplest
method
of
applying
gluing
pressure is by the use of nails, either with or without nailing strips.
If the nails are
to be withdrawn later, the use of a nailing strip
(fig. 5-55)
is almost a necessity, but
in some cases the nails are not withdrawn and no nailing strips are used.
Nails set
in nailing strips prepared in advance also speed the assembly work and reduce the
danger of extended assembly periods.
If nails are used, the spacing should conform
to previous recommendations.
For most plywood skins a spacing of approximately
1 inch is satisfactory, with one row of nails for each one-half inch in width of framing
member and with the nails in each row staggered with respect to nails in adjacent
rows.
The length of the nails should be sufficient to reach at least three-eighths inch
into the heavier supporting members, but they should not penetrate through the
lighter supports.
Some manufacturers have found
a nailing machine of consider-
able convenience in preparing the nailing strips.
The machine can be set for the
desired nail spacing and adjusted merely to start the nails into the strips.
A uniform
spacing
is thus assured, and one operator on a nailing machine saves
the time of
several in preparing the strips.
Nailing machines have given some trouble in feed-
ing the small nails, but one operator solves this difficulty by attaching a small mag-
netic vibrator to the feed box.

--- PAGE 280 ---
274
ANC BULLETIN—WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
I
Figure
5-55.—Attaching the plywood skin to a fuselage frame.
NAILING START5 HERE
AND PROGRESSES DOWN
Figure 5-56.—Hold-down band clamp for nail-strip gluing of leading edge of skin.

--- PAGE 281 ---
I
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
275
A tension clamp, illustrated in figure 5-56, may be used to hold the leading-edge
skin in intimate contact with the ribs while the nailing strips arc applied.
Cotton
webbing approximately one-half inch wide
is often used under nailing strips to fa-
cilitate removal
of the strips and nails
(fig.
5-57).
A simple device illustrated in
figure 5-58 has been found helpful in removing the nails and broken nailing strips from
webbing so that
it may be reused.
In nail-strip gluing the larger assemblies
(fig. 5-55), the plywood skin is tacked
lightly at one corner, then adjusted and tacked lightly in the opposite corner,
in-
specting carefully to insure that the skin is properly positioned.
The first placement
Figure 5-57.—Cotton webbing under nailing strips facilitates removal of the strips and nails.
should be as nearly exact as possible, and moving of the skin over the frame should
be reduced to a minimum.
Otherwise the glue that has been spread on the frame
may be scraped
off and the amount remaining may be
insufficient to form a good
joint.
In small assemblies
(fig. 5-54) the cover may be attached first along one edge.
When the plywood has been fastened lightly in
its proper position,
a nailing
strip is laid over one of the principal supports and nailed in place, the nailing proceed-
ing from the center outward to avoid wrinkles and bulges in the skin and to aid in
flowing the glue to a thin film.
The nailing strips should be carefully aligned to in-
sure that the nails strike the support, and the nails should be driven firmly into place.
Severe blows of the hammer that leave a definite crushed spot on the nailing strip
should be
avoided.
Several light blows which leave the
nail head flush with the
nailing strip are recommended in preference to a single hard blow.
In wing struc-
tures, the first nailing strips will ordinarily be laid over a spar.
In the fuselage the
first
nailing
strips may be over
a central longeron or fuselage
ring.
The second
nailing strip
is usually laid over a support running at right angles to the first nailing

--- PAGE 282 ---
276
ANC BULLETIN—WOOD AIRCRAFT INSPECTION AND FABRICATION
strip.
The successive strips are then nailed in place, always working from the area
already attached, as from the center outward or from the top down, in order to per-
mit the skin to assume the shape
of the supporting frame without buckling and
to assist in obtaining a thin, uniform film of glue
(fig. 5-55).
Enough strips must
be used, of course, to cover the entire surface of members supporting the skin.
Heat
lamps are sometimes used to accelerate the setting of gll
Assemblies of this type.
When such lamps are used,
it is important that humidity be controlled to prevent
excessive drying of the wood.
The use
of heat lamps to accelerate
setting of the
glue
is not recommended unless humidity is likewise controlled.
A device for ac-
celerating the setting of secondary glue joints on a wing tip is shown in figure 5-59.
Figure 5-58.—Device for removing nails and broken nailing strips from webbing.
When the making of a scarf joint is a part of an assembly operation
(fig. 5-55),
cold-setting glues are suggested as the most suitable for the purpose.
A nail-strip
gluing technique is usually used.
The size of nails and nail spacing will vary some-
what with different operations, but two rows of nails per inch of width is suggested,
with a nail spacing as recommended earlier in this section.
If rapid curing of the
glue is essential to production schedules,
it may prove convenient to accelerate the
setting of the glue by the use of moderately elevated temperatures applied after the
parts have been nailed in place.
Resistance elements, often fastened in place by
the nailing strip directly on the surface of the plywood, are suitable for the purpose,
provided the time-temperature cycle used
is regulated to prevent damage
to
the
wood or glue.
Lamps and warm rooms may also be used
if provisions are made to
C7-
—.5 IDES OF CABINET—
HUMIDIFIER
i
'HEAT LAMP5 AND
R£FL £C TOR
5
FLOOR LIN£
Figure 5-59.—Device for accelerating the setting of secondary glue joints by means
of heat lamps.
control the relative humidity in order to prevent excessive drying and consequent
moving of parts during the curing period.
The design of plywood skins for aircraft sometimes calls for joints to be made
between skins of unequal thickness.
Figure 5-60 illustrates two methods of forming
these joints between the main wing skin and the leading-edge skin.
Figure 5-60, A,
shows a scarf joint in which the length of scarf is equal on both skins.
The length
of scarf should be at least 12 times the thickness of the thicker skin.
Figure 5-60, B,
illustrates a modified butt joint in which the thicker plywood is rabbeted to receive
the
thinner
skin.
This type
of
joint
is
less
desirable,
particularly
for plywood
wings not covered with
fabric,
as the
finish
is likely
to
fail over the butt
joint.
Neither joint should be relied on for the full tensile strength of the thinner plywood.

--- PAGE 283 ---
PROCESSING AND FABRICATION
277
5.47 1 3.
Special Gluing Jigs.
Several other methods of applying gluing pressure
have been devised.
Often these methods require more or less complicated jigs, and
some are applicable to one particular operation but not to others.
One of the simpler
jigs is designed to apply gluing pressure to the plywood covering of the leading edge
of a wing.
It consists essentially of supports or cauls
set in
a metal frame in a
position corresponding to the positions of the ribs in the leading edge.
In operation,
the preformed skin is first laid in place in the jig.
The leading-edge frame, with the
ribs attached to the spar and with the surface of the ribs coated with glue,
is then
laid in the formed skin and so
positioned
that each
rib
is bearing on
a support
or
caul
in
the
jig.
Gluing
pressure
is obtained
partially by
applying
pressure
against the top of the spar.
Pressure so applied reacts principally against the nose
of the curve, while pressure against the sides
is relatively low.
Pressure against
the sides
is brought up
to satisfactory magnitude by the use
of clamps or other
devices
to exert an inward pressure on the two prongs of each support or
caul.
The supports are often lined with strips of rubber to provide a more nearly uniform
distribution of pressure.
If such a device
is used, the gluing pressures should be
Figure 5-60.—Two methods of forming joints between skins of unequal thickness.
A, scarf joint in which the length of scarf is
equal on both skins.
B, modified butt joint in which the thicker plywood
is rabbeted to receive the thinner skin.
calculated on the basis of the actual gluing area and they should be approximately
150 pounds per square inch or the maximum pressure that the frame will withstand,
whichever is the smaller.
Another device for applying gluing pressure in covering wings
is illustrated in
figure 5H31, A.
Its use requires the construction of a jig to hold the wing frame in
place and to provide for the attachment of the metal pressing frame illustrated at
the location of each rib.
The gluing pressure is obtained by laying a caul, c