d.
The steering cable had not been strong enough to stand 
the immense pressure ; it had snapped. " Margarete " 
went over with a jolt on to her right wing. I tried all I knew 
to get her level again with my remaining controls, but in 
vain ! 
We were too low down to do any good. Beneath 
me were two flying machines at the starting place and a 
black, moving throng of people. Heaven be thanked, the 
strong wind was driving me past them ; I descended but 
Margarete's right wing hit the ground with a crack, and a 
groan and the next moment her body crashed. I found 
myself entangled in a mass of spars, ribs and fabric, and the 
cracking continued. I tried to turn round ; then I saw 
Chief-Instructor Stamer come running towards me with 
horrorstruck eyes. I looked up, and saw that the other 
wing, which was standing upright, was about to collapse. 
Seeing the danger, Stamer caught the wing and managed to 
ease it off a bit ; I turned my head aside, and it crashed 
into the grass close beside me, groaning in every joint. 
p^Good old bird ! 
How we tended and cherished you. 
At every competition something new was added to you. 
In 1923 you wore a yellow dress and had a very, very shaky 
elevator and ailerons. That was soon altered. In 1924 
we gave you beautiful white wings, and your white dress 
suited you on the dazzling dune sand of 1925. We always 
thought of something new for you when we took you to 
a Meeting. And how the Russians admired you who came 
to the Rhon in 1925, and they also adored you in the 
Crimea, when you sailed with Hesselbach through the 
air for flights of three and six hours. In 1926, on the day

--- PAGE 153 ---
io8 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
that Kegel brought off his thunderstorm flight, you 
demonstrated in storm, rain, and hail squalls that you still 
remained young in spite of your three years. That time 
you were rewarded with a prize for special merit. In 
Rossitten in 1927 we had started you with a beautiful 
new gown of varnish it was your ambition to break 
Schulz's endurance record. Oh, that wind! After six 
hours it stole the upward current that bore you aloft. 
You fought like a lioness that time for every foot of height, 
long after all the other soarers had given up. Brother 
Wind grudged you the triumph.
You attended your eighth Meeting. Where were all the 
other champions who flew forth with you in 1923 ? 
You 
outlived them all, and you could have wished for no better 
death. In the midst of the battle for a great prize  
though you were ever ready, were the prize great or small  
it found you. How we shall all miss you most of all 
the pupils ! 
You helped all our pilots in their Soaring 
Flight Test. Yet, faithful as you have been to us through 
four long years of life, you will not leave us without others 
to take your place.
II
I had just landed the " Darmstadt " near the Flying 
School in the middle of the Wasserkuppe plateau. Nothing 
was impossible with this bird ; it steered as easily as a motor- 
plane.
I slipped down over a wing that nearly touched the ground 
and then flattened the machine out at the last moment  
the best way to land at a goal. And then the pessimists 
began : " You won't stop till you have killed the * Darm- 
stadt/ too ! "
So I had landed beside the school behind the hut. We 
rolled her up to the starting place, which to-day was close 
to the hut. The wind was south-west by south, velocity 
six to seven feet per second. At half-past three I said : 
" Come, let's have our coffee ; there's nothing doing to-day 
in this light breeze." I had no inclination to fly, In 
the flight just completed I had barely attained a height of

--- PAGE 154 ---
SOARING PILOTS REPORT 
109
five hundred feet above my starting point, which seemed to 
me too little for a distance flight. " But a special prize 
has been offered to-day ; to win it you need only fly about a 
mile less than yesterday's best. You must start! " said 
a friend. " Twelve miles ! 
Well, have your own way ! " 
I replied.
The barograph was hung in the machine by the officials. 
" Everything ready ? " I asked. Behind me was the tail 
crew, the foremost of whom held fast to the tail skid ; in 
front were the launching crew, to right and to left five 
men formed a wedge on the thick double rubber rope, 
the ring of which hung on the starting hook at the bow.
" Ready ? " 
" Pull out." 
The launching rope is 
drawn out ; the launching crew, bending to their task 
stretch it to its utmost tension. 
" Run ! " " Let go ! " 
The holder lets go !
Oh, what a thrilling moment it is when the machine 
shoots up into the air ! 
Not only for the onlookers, no, 
for me, too, this is the finest moment of the flight. A 
force, a power resides in the taut rubber cable which can 
only be realized by the man who has been propelled into 
the air in this fashion. A torpedo steers itself when 
released from its tube ; the soaring machine is an aerial 
torpedo, even though its steering mechanism is guided by 
a human hand.
The upwind was no better than before ; the projecting 
ridge, which is the northern continuation of the Flyers' 
Memorial rock, was the only place where I found a slight 
current, but, tacking over this slope, I crawled up to a 
height of four hundred and sixty feet. 
The wind blew 
in the best possible direction for a long-distance flight, 
but at this elevation how was I to cross the great valley 
in which lay Brand, Wickers and Reulbach ? 
First I flew 
along the slopes east of the Ulster, for I felt sure that 
this was the way to bring off a long flight I had worked 
out on the map for similar winds a year ago. Turning 
my back to the wind, I flew down to the Ulster, but what 
a horrid downdraught caught me below the Kuppe! 
Alas for my excellent, hard-won altitude ! 
Foot by foot I 
was pushed down.

--- PAGE 155 ---
i io 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
But at last the gliding angle decreased northward of 
Brand and Wickers. I found there was an upward breeze 
playing round two small hilltops. 
So now to try for the 
Buchschirmberg! One thousand seven hundred feet, says 
the altimeter, one thousand six hundred. 
And then, 
hurrah, the bird is rising. I turn before the slope and 
soar above it ; I have managed the leap across which 
seemed impossible.
If I can carry on now without a mistake, I shall pull 
off the big flight. But what about the wind ? 
I positively 
must not fly round the wrong side of any summit, for if so 
I shall be on the downwind side, lose height and be 
compelled to make a forced landing.
No chimney smoke was to be seen far and wide, 
but the shadows thrown by the many cloud-hills were the 
best of weather-cocks that day. The smoke trails from 
chimneys may be deceptive as they are often too strongly 
affected by purely local conditions. 
I had now to make for 
the Auersberg ; in many arguments I had heard many 
opinions about this summit, but this time I found that my 
own theories were the right ones, for here I rose again 
almost to my starting height! Once it was nearly all up 
with me. The drift of the cloud shadows across the slanting 
slope (some optical illusion, perhaps) must have led me 
astray ; I got into a downward current, and in less than 
fifteen seconds it dragged me down nearly three hundred 
feet. It flung the machine violently about, and I was more 
than thankful to get back to the upwind side, having learnt 
the lesson that I must be still more careful. Often I 
gained height for further gliding by tacking before broad 
single slopes.
As I flew over the Dietrichsberg, I saw a quarry six 
or seven hundred feet below me, where workmen were 
breaking up stones and carrying them away in wheel- 
barrows. 
I bawled a loud " Hallo ! " down to them. 
They turned round several times without being able to make 
out where the sound came from ; then I shouted again. 
At last one of them discovered me and pointed me out to 
the others, all of whom stood staring up, speechless. How 
well I understood ! 
To this day I who have seen so many

--- PAGE 156 ---
SOARING PILOTS REPORT 
in
flying machines can watch them for hours at a time. The 
serenity and majesty with which these aircraft circle upwards 
in the wind like birds of prey never fails to move me and 
only when the pilot calls down to me do I cease my awe- 
inspired vigil to send a jubilant greeting up to him on high.
I had flown over Vacha, which lies where the Ulster and 
the Werra meet. Hardly anyone noticed me, though there 
too I shouted down my " Hallo ! " The one thousand three 
hundred feet of space seemed to swallow up my voice. 
The rest of my trip was an easy gliding flight. 
Before I 
reached Vacha I had done all my real soaring ; I had 
utilized the upwinds in the new regions to carry me along, 
but here the slopes lay almost parallel to the wind, and up- 
currents were not to be expected. From a distance of 
several kilometres I saw a great meadow beyond Berka, 
which seemed a good place for me to land. 
I brushed 
over the houses of Berka, with the wind at my back, at a 
height of hardly more than from seventy to a hundred feet ; 
I could almost hear the grass rustling. 
I found such a 
long meadow that I ventured to land with the wind behind 
me ; the starting hook beheaded the clover and bom- 
barded my face with the blossoms. 
I screwed up my eyes 
and rejoiced in the merry game which was new to me.
And now the first curious folk came hurrying along on 
bicycles from Herda, which is only a few hundred yards 
away. I took possession of one of the cycles and rode off 
to send a message from the village to the Wasserkuppe. 
When I had dismantled my machine and stabled it in a 
farm, the mayor of the place, beaming with joy, presented 
me with a bouquet. But my joy was even greater when one 
of my comrades arrived on a motor cycle and shook hands 
with me !
I had flown thirty-two miles and so fulfilled the first of 
the conditions laid down for the offered prize.
LIEUTENANT DINORT REPORTS
It is fine to gain a world record ; it is splendid when 
this means that you spread the honour and fame of your 
homeland all over the world, while at the same time you

--- PAGE 157 ---
ii2 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
are doing pioneer work. I set out upon my endurance 
flight of fourteen hours and forty-three minutes inspired 
by the sublimity of this idea and encouraged by the 
tradition of Ferdinand Schulz who was so closely connected 
with our Rossitten.
On the afternoon of October igth, 1929, we drew the 
machine to the starting place on Predin Hill, near Rossitten. 
The breeze blew gently over the Kurische Haff from the 
east with a speed of only eighteen feet per second. The 
afternoon sun shone enticingly from a blue sky flecked with 
fleecy clouds. The Flying School pupils were diligently 
practising gliding under their experienced instructors, 
Arndt and Lorenz. The members of the launching crew 
grouped themselves eagerly around me, as with my pockets 
stuffed full of chocolate and sandwiches and with a ginger 
beer bottle on each side for balance I was heaved up into 
my airy seat by willing comrades. " Barograph all right ? 
Ready ? 
Pull out! Run! Let go ! " The launching 
rope fell at 3.20 p.m. and the machine rose in an upward 
current that gave me a good height to start off with.
After a short test of the flying area I settled upon a 
" pendulum " flight of about three quarters of a mile long. 
I tried to fix in my mind exactly the contours of the country 
at the turning places in order to be as well prepared as 
possible for the forthcoming night flight. The first few 
hours passed unusually quickly, as thoughts concerning 
my plans for the night helped to pass the time. Meanwhile 
the sun was approaching the horizon over the Baltic Sea, 
and gazing at a wonderful, red, glowing evening sky, I ate 
my supper comfortably, floating along almost in silence 
and accompanied by ever-changing flocks of birds of 
passage. They flew trustingly close beside me and greeted 
me with their cries. Then, almost suddenly, came the 
mysterious darkness, with a cloudy sky and fresher breeze. 
The expected moon, which was to have lighted my course, 
did not appear, so now it became urgent for me to quickly 
obtain some artificial light from below. Captain Rohre, 
the Director of the Flying School at Rossitten, started to 
make the necessary arrangements, but they took time. 
In my airy seat I began to feel distinctly ill at ease ; below

--- PAGE 158 ---
SOARING PILOTS REPORT 
113
me in the dark lay a ghostly greyish-white level stretch 
which I knew to be the dunes, while a darker area beyond 
them I recognized the water of the Kurische Haff. 
It was impossible to calculate height ; below me I saw 
vague human figures in the darkness, and now the time 
began to drag. Every moment I expected to find myself 
in collision with a sandhill ; the breeze freshened and I 
gradually lost all feeling for the position of my machine. 
The open seat gave me no help ; I had to do my best by 
noting the position of the curved border of the wings, 
which were edged with bars of hickory wood that showed 
up fairly well against the sky. From time to time Captain 
Rohre enabled me to gain some idea of my height by 
striking matches, and at last the desired ground lights made 
their appearance in the shape of petroleum stable lanterns. 
But they were hardly in action a moment before they were 
blown out by the ever-freshening breeze, which was now 
blowing at a velocity of sixty feet a second. They were 
lit again and again till all the available matches were used 
up, but only one lantern remained alight. Many were 
buried beneath the drifting sand that the wind drove over 
the dunes. Magnesium flares were now lit, but their 
light was too glaring ; they dazzled me so much that I 
could hardly maintain my position in the air. At last 
there came fresh and reliable help in the form of electric 
pocket torches which had been procured from the village 
of Rossitten. 
Then new boxes of matches and supplies 
of petroleum arrived, so that there was enough material 
to keep the ground illuminated all through the night.
The valiant members of my aerial police force grew 
hourly more accustomed to their work ; I, too, was getting 
more used to this night flying. Towards midnight the 
full moon looked out now and then through the clouds 
which covered the sky, and in its pallid light the sandhills 
assumed grotesque shapes. After the moon had finally 
withdrawn behind the cloud curtains, the night seemed 
as if it would never end. From below the watchers tried 
to call up the time to me, but their voices were swallowed 
by the wind so that I could not understand a word.
How slowly the time passed ! 
And then there came yet

--- PAGE 159 ---
ii4 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
another trial of my endurance rain ! 
It was an unspeak- 
able relief when at last it ceased and the grey dawn announc- 
ed a new day. Muffled shapes the watchful sentries on the 
dunes became visible. And now the time passed more 
quickly and flying grew easier. 
I breakfasted.
At last I had flown as long as the holder of the former 
world record. Half an hour later my control lever broke. 
The good glider which had endured so well with me through 
the stormy night landed me at three minutes past six on 
October aoth, 1929.
I thanked God, who had so graciously helped me in 
my need.
OUR FIRST SOARING FLIGHT IN AMERICA
By P. LAUBENTHAL
Cape Cod ! 
The name conjures up in my mind 
our wonderful experiences' in a beautiful warm New 
England summer on the Atlantic coast of America. 
As I pen these words, only three months, but four thousand 
miles separate us from the golden slopes of the sandhills 
of that peninsula. It so chanced that its position made it 
the starting point of American history, and it afforded us 
flyers the best opportunity we had ever experienced in the 
history of Soaring Flight.
" Where the pilgrims found maize the German gliders 
await insurance," wrote our friend D. Rochford, a true 
flying enthusiast, in his Boston paper soon after we had 
settled down on Cape Cod.
His words sounded an impatient note and yet they were 
comprehensible to the expectant American readers who 
read with growing interest the reports of our arrival on 
the New England coast and were eager to hear of a record 
flight in a motorless aeroplane.
The discovery of Cape Cod for our motorless flying was 
due to chance and the kind endeavours of a Boston friend, 
who was a member of the North German Lloyd.
Here on this coast lay the first settlements of the Pilgrim 
Fathers, those stern Puritans who gained a footing there

--- PAGE 160 ---
SOARING PILOTS REPORT 
115
at the beginning of the seventeenth century and became the 
founders of the United States of America in general and 
the State of Massachusetts in particular.
Their descendants have put up memorials to the historical 
past, and on our Corn Hill, a steeply sloping dune beside 
the bay, the crest of which ran south by north-north-west, 
we read on a bronze plate (the granite pedestal of which 
was buried in the sand) that sixteen Pilgrim Fathers 
landed there on November i6th, 1620, to obtain from the 
Indian inhabitants corn for their own fields. In the little 
neighbouring town of Provincetown, where fishermen ply 
their trade and health-seekers and artists find refreshment 
and inspiration, there is a memorial tablet on the Town 
Hall, perpetuating the first Constitution of Massachusetts.
But I do not propose to write history, except that of 
our flights on Cape Cod, and will therefore proceed to 
give the reader some idea of the character of the landscape.
Cape Cod is a peninsula stretching out like a bent finger 
into the sea north-east of New York and south-east of Bos- 
ton. 
Its outer extremity, on which stands Provincetown, 
points almost directly to Boston, whence it can be reached 
by steamer in four hours. 
The country reminded us of 
the Kurische Nehrung, but without its gloom. 
Soft, 
billowy hills are covered with dry, grey-green grass and 
sapless, unkempt, straggling green whortleberry bushes. 
In the fruitful marshy country at their feet, we see every- 
where the white-painted wooden cottages of the summer 
visitors.
Our flying area lay almost at the north-east point of the 
peninsula, eleven miles from Provincetown. The steep 
slopes of these dunes extend westward, and from their 
summits the coast of the opposite mainland is plainly 
visible in clear weather.
We took two of the little summer cottages and made 
ourselves as comfortable in them as possible.
Here we wanted to fly, but starting conditions were 
unfavourable. At first we were in no particular hurry, for 
we had still to conclude our insurance arrangements. 
Moreover the wind had not yet been able to make up its 
mind to blow favourably for us ; we had therefore leisure to

--- PAGE 161 ---
n6 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
explore the coast and investigate its possibilities. We 
found that the steep coast extending outwards in a huge 
convex bulge towards the ocean seemed more likely to be 
practicable for us than the inland slopes. To begin with, 
starting conditions were far better there, but we realized 
that it must depend entirely upon the prevailing winds 
whether we undertook our first flights from Corn Hill 
or the neighbourhood of Highland Lights, a signalling 
station on the ocean side.
We had thought that we could make our preparations 
in all secrecy, but here we were greatly mistaken. All 
events in America are exposed to a much greater publicity 
than is the case in Europe, and our manager, Frank Blunk, 
had already drawn attention in a newspaper to the arrival 
of three German soarers on Cape Cod. Unfortunately 
for us, he thus saddled us with the pack of reporters and 
film photographers who are always at the service of an 
omnipotent press on such occasions. In the days before 
our first flight we were regularly besieged ; as a matter 
of course, this army soon made itself as much at home in 
our two cottages as we were ourselves in a manner that was 
as amazing as it was naive. But among these pressmen 
there were some splendid fellows who showed the most 
complete understanding of our difficult position and did 
much service to us by their reports.
For us the period of waiting was a great trial. We wanted 
to fly ; everyone wanted to see us flying and urged us to 
action with all the emphasis of a press that meant so much 
to us as far as popular success was concerned. We received 
weather reports and carried on our investigations day by day. 
The blacksmith of Provincetown made us a starting 
apparatus and rings for the launching cable, while with 
mingled hopes and fears we awaited the coming of a fair 
wind, of which we could not make use until we received 
news from New York.
On July i yth we drew the " Darmstadt " (which had 
previously been exhibited at the Detroit Air Olympics) 
out of its shed and put it together. One after the other 
we were compelled to climb in and pose ; then an entirely 
unknown lady got in and hardly was her picture taken than

--- PAGE 162 ---
SOARING PILOTS REPORT 
117
another belated photographer came running with his 
box of tricks and wanted everyone to pose again.
On the following days the wind changed to the east and 
wafted heavy, low clouds against the slopes of Highland 
Lights. As this wind promised to hold we motored on 
July 20th, with the " Darmstadt " in tow, to the ocean slope 
where we proposed to attempt a start. The rumour of our 
coming had spread rapidly and we steered to the little 
parking place into which the coast road broadened out amid 
hearty cheers from a crowd of spectators. The wind was 
favourable but the clouds hung deep and were drifting in 
black masses over the ocean. Before we could unhitch 
the trailer, rain and mist had rolled up and we hastened to 
house our bird in the shelter of a neighbouring barn.
A day later we refused to let the weather deter us from 
putting the " Darmstadt " together. It was a mistake on 
our part, for the wind was not blowing strongly enough to 
make flight possible, and expectations had been excited to 
the highest degree. Reporters, film-shooters and summer 
visitors surrounded us, questioning, taking notes, begging 
for autographs. They challenged us, alleging that we 
were always putting them off, and demanded that we should 
at least show them something. What was the use of talking 
and explaining ? 
To prevent public interest cooling and 
spare ourselves the otherwise inevitable sarcasm of the 
press, a flight of sorts had to be made. 
So we decided upon 
a " good-will " start which should end in a glide down to 
the whitish-yellow sea beach.
There was very little room, and the starting-run for the 
launching crew was all too short, but something had to be 
risked, even though we were working with untrained 
volunteers. It was not easy to select our helpers, for 
everyone wanted to take part. After giving our crew 
preparatory exercises with the rope, Hesselbach climbed 
in and began to give the starting orders, while Captain 
Rohre directed the tail crew.
A short whistle. 
As the tension began to make itself 
felt our bird slipped forward until brought up sharp by the 
tail crew. At the second whistle things began to get a move 
on and the crew ran forward in the direction of the slope.

--- PAGE 163 ---
n8 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
Then a third whistle, which was for the tail crew. I was 
the foremost one on the rope, at the right, and shouted : 
" Run run! " The tension slackened ; as I ran, I looked 
round. The machine slipped, glided, seemed to free itself 
and slowly approached the slope that fell away immediately 
ahead of me. The start had been a poor one, and it was 
made worse by the dead eddy directly behind the edge 
of the incline.
What was to be our luck ? 
After a moment of suspense 
the skid slid again, the left wing turned towards the ground, 
and, swaying slightly, the bird came to a standstill close to 
the edge. We all breathed more freely, but the silence of 
the spectators betrayed the anxious expectation with which 
they had followed the last movements of the machine. 
Although they acknowledged our personal courage, we 
could read on their faces their doubt as to whether motorless 
flying were humanly possible. We knew that we could 
not make another start here.
Wonderful golf links lay a few hundred yards to the south 
of the station, with their smooth green lawns extending 
right up to the slope. We all know how precious and holy 
his golf links are to the American, but nevertheless, through 
the influence of a lady friend, we obtained permission to use 
the links on condition that all spectators should be kept 
outside their boundaries.
There four further starts were made in a faint easterly 
breeze. They were hardly to be termed starts in the strict 
sense of the word as it was impossible to hold back the plane 
until the rope reached its full tension. 
The spectators 
smiled more broadly, and the press representatives hardly 
troubled to conceal their doubts. Further attempts had 
to be abandoned as the wind dropped completely.
But on Thursday, July 26th, a strong north-east wind 
blew from a cloudless sky. A brief inspection of the ocean 
side raised my hopes ; a wonderful steady breeze was 
blowing towards me across the open plateau, and the 
distance out at which " white horses " topped the waves 
proved its constancy. This was just the weather for us ; 
within an hour we had the machine ready to start. The wind 
blew from the north-east at a velocity of about twenty-four

--- PAGE 164 ---
SOARING PILOTS REPORT 
119
feet per second. Some golfers, clad in the white flannels of 
summer, willingly helped us to start. The same commands 
as before. 
Slowly at first, but gradually gathering speed 
our bird glided on her wide spread pinions ; she floated 
gently to the edge and then, caught up by a rising breeze, 
she flew off in a gentle left-hand turn, following the lines of 
the^-. dunes. 
Spectators, pressmen and photographers at 
first stood dumb, and their silence lasted until the plane 
began to rise. 
Then an immense and uncontrolled 
enthusiasm broke loose ; cheers rose up to the bird which 
was now soaring more than three hundred feet above our 
heads. Everybody rushed to us, congratulated us, shook 
hands with us. " To see a thing like that is worth waiting 
for a whole month/' said a cinema man, grasping our 
hands excitedly ; then he dashed back to his camera.
The " Darmstadt " was still flying calmly and steadily 
above us, but it seemed that Hesselbach intended to land, 
for he flew inland in wide curves, turned back and let the 
machine float close down over us. Then he glided over the 
edge of the slope and swung himself aloft once more, a 
manoeuvre which evoked further enthusiasm. After a few 
more flights backwards and forwards, accompanied by 
steep turns, our bird took an inland course. Hesselbach 
was seeking to land.
As he descended, the whole surface of the plane was 
visible for a moment ; then it disappeared behind a rise 
in the ground but immediately reappeared, flying low down 
and directly towards us. The machine settled down 
gently, slipped along a little, and subsided slowly on to its 
left wing. The flight had lasted an hour all but two minutes. 
All the spectators rushed up cheering, shouting, whistling, 
and giving vent to their delight in every possible way.
The bird lay motionless ; enough had been done for one 
day. And while we were still busy dismantling the machine 
the news of this first soaring flight in the New World was 
being transmitted over all the cables of the New World.
The reception which this noble sport met with in America 
can perhaps best be realized from the'title of an American 
leading article : 
" SOARING GERMANY'S GIFT TO SPORTING AMERICA,"

--- PAGE 165 ---
120 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
A RECORD FLIGHT ABOVE THE CLOUDS AND OVER THE SEA
By WOLFRAM HIRTH
Many have been my experiences during the six years 
of my career as a glider and soarer crashes, storm- 
flights, altitude flights, etc., but the first time I actually 
flew in the clouds and in fog was in France, at the Vauville 
Flying Meeting.
This Meeting had not been favoured with much wind, 
but, as it was drawing to its close, on the last day but 
one a fine west wind with a velocity of twenty-one feet 
per second sprang up. That day I resolved to attempt to 
break Nehring's distance record of sixteen and a half miles.
But the weather was doubtful ; over the " aerodrome " 
hung a bank of cloud, at a height of about two hundred and 
sixty feet, which began a mile away on the coast and remained 
stationary all day. The upward current was so strengthened 
by the wind velocity that I reached the clouds in a few 
seconds and plunged into thick fog. Everything was 
white around me. I told myself that this cloud layer could 
not be so very thick, because far away out at sea the sun 
was shining in places. I resolved to try to get through it.
My conjecture was right ; in a little while the air grew 
clearer, and soon my great bird hovered a thousand feet 
above the starting place, which naturally I could not see.
It was so wonderfully beautiful up there that I flew for 
three quarters of an hour between two layers of cloud, as 
far above me, some seven thousand feet high, there was 
another cloud ceiling, which only let the sun through here 
and there. When I read on my altimeter a height of one 
thousand one hundred and fifty-five feet, i.e., when I 
was flying some one thousand six hundred feet above 
sea-level, I set out on a distance flight.
In order to get round the steep Cap de Flamanville 
(which my comrades had not succeeded in doing during the 
previous days) I flew about two miles out to sea. It was 
a risky proceeding in a motorless plane, but with the aid of 
the excellent altimeter that indicated my reserve height, I 
succeeded. The flight went so quietly that I could let

--- PAGE 166 ---
SOARING PILOTS REPORT 
121
my thoughts go woolgathering. On a road below me I 
saw a boy being whipped by his mother ; I shouted down 
" Hallo ! " whereupon the stalwart dame let go and the 
lad ran off. 
I suppose he took me for his guardian angel. 
On the other hand I was certainly mistaken for the devil by 
an old woman who was gathering driftwood on a lonely 
part of the beach, for she sat down in sheer amazement when 
she suddenly saw me flying along silently and mysteriously 
sixty-six feet above the sandhills.
After a flight of seventeen miles I reached the last and 
most dangerous mile of my motorless trip the stage where 
I had to round the Cap de Gate ret. I began this difficult 
undertaking at a height somewhere between thirty and 
fifty feet, but dropped until I was only fifteen feet above the 
ground. On my left, above my wings, were overhanging 
rocks ; on my right, the immeasurable depths of the dark 
sea. The spray was flung right up to me, and I felt 
anything but comfortable. Then came the outermost 
point of the cape, and with it salvation. Round it lay the 
long, lively beach of a bathing resort, crowded with fashion- 
able visitors, children, hotels, deck chairs in a word, I 
had reached Cateret.
I landed smoothly and was surrounded by hundreds of 
spectators who inundated me with questions, such as : 
" When will you fly away again ? " " Have you come from 
America ? " " Where are your engine and propellor ? " 
Then, too, came a custom house official who wanted me to 
pay duty on my machine and show him my passport. 
Then I was invited to dinner and feted.
But the best of all was my own pleasure in the wonderful 
flight, the new record and the winning of the competition.
ABOVE THE RHON AS A PASSENGER IN A MOTORLESS PLANE
By DR. ALFRED DETIG
" Pull out ! ... Run ! ... Let go ! n
The lean young man before me utters these words 
slowly, loudly, with cold matter of factness. 
But this 
time I know that they are of vital importance to

--- PAGE 167 ---
122 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
myself ; there is no turning back, for I have definitely 
embarked upon my first soaring flight ! 
Our white bird 
has been lying in line with many others upon the rounded, 
grassy mountain height ; a few moments ago two cousins 
wedged me in with much difficulty behind the pilot in the 
incredibly narrow cockpit of the soarer, which now sheathes 
my long body and legs as closely as the cocoon enfolds 
the chrysalis. We start with a velocity of fourteen " m.p.," 
i.e. " man power/' At the first word of command two 
teams of men put themselves in motion and pull out the 
two pairs of rubber ropes to the other ends of which we are 
attached ! 
But meanwhile our plane is held fast by the 
tail by four sturdy fellows who dig their heels into the grassy 
soil. And now at the second word of command the fourteen 
begin to run for all they are worth and for all the rubber is 
worth, and the one who pulls most frantically is my cousin ! 
And then, then . . .
The mighty word " Let go ! " for which I have been 
waiting with strung-up nerves, rings like a deafening gong 
in my ears and releases me at one fell swoop from all my 
tension. What has happened ? 
Has the narrow wooden 
cockpit grasped me convulsively, like a clenched fist, and 
flung me up one hundred or one hundred and fifty feet ? 
I am conscious of such strong pressure that I instantly lose 
all powers of sight and hearing and try to huddle myself 
up in my narrow box. But this absolute passivity during 
such an unprecedented experience seems to me intolerable, 
and gradually my brain begins to work. We are still 
hanging on to the rubber ropes, and I cast a rapid glance 
over the plane's wooden side, which gives me a feeling of 
safety. 
I watch the rubber ropes detach themselves from 
the hook and whistle as they whirl down earthwards. 
Far below us our sudden release has sent several youths of 
the launching crew staggering down the slope, and he who 
staggers most and farthest is again my cousin ! 
Our 
soarer now makes a gentle bow of the kind that I have 
often noticed from below ; 
it is her sign of gratitude 
because we have now freed ourselves from all earthly 
things and are floating out over the deep valley, away from 
the crown of the mountain top. With our plane we form a

--- PAGE 168 ---
SOARING PILOTS REPORT 
123
living arrow that has been shot from a taut bow out and 
up into endless space ! 
It is an unforgettable moment 
for me of incomparable significance for those able to 
appreciate it. For one brief instant our aircraft seems to 
be a rocket that shoots up from the earth by its own force 
 a harbinger of forthcoming developments ! 
And from 
now onward we must depend entirely upon ourselves, for 
already, one moment after the start, we see one thousand 
three hundred feet beneath us in the valley, a forest and 
jagged rocks . . . not a very attractive prospect.
At first we sail straight on in the direction of the Eube, 
but my trusty pilot turns suddenly against the wind above 
the Gersfeld Valley, and just as suddenly my heart is in 
my boots. I feel quite distinctly the thin wires rubbing 
against my coat ; they run right and left along the sides to 
the elevator and the rudder at the end of the fuselage. 
I therefore exhale strongly so as to make myself as thin as 
possible and avoid hindering the steering. Am I not with 
my thirteen odd stone too stout a passenger ?
Now we are canting over in a turn, and a shiver runs 
down my back to my knees and thence to the extremities 
of my long legs which I have twisted into an inextricable 
knot. Anyone who knows only the flight of engine- 
driven machines always feels that a soarer is side-slipping 
over the inner wing when it goes into a turn, even though 
he may have been previously warned, because he misses 
the mechanical forces that right the machine.
Now we have turned, and the wings with their fifty 
foot span, delicate as cobwebs, moan and groan under the 
strong head wind. For a brief moment I ask myself : 
" Will the ' birdlime' hold that connects the thinly 
varnished slips of wood ? " I began to wish I had listened to 
the friends who warned me and pointed out the mad folly 
of expecting a machine weighing about two hundredweight, 
which weight is diffused over a considerable surface, to 
bear the additional three hundredweight which the two 
people seated in it must weigh. But I trust myself to my 
lucky star, to the efficiency of the constructors, and call 
upon Coue for help, repeating again and again, " It will 
stand it, it will stand it." But soon these anxieties and

--- PAGE 169 ---
124 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
fruitless thoughts vanish, and then comes the great miracle.
We are rising steadily as we sail along parallel with the 
celebrated Pelzner slope, sometimes slowly and steeply, as 
in a lift, sometimes more quickly and with shorter steps, 
as if on an invisible staircase in space. 
I see no force, I 
hear none, I only divine : and I revel in a boundless 
intoxication of the senses in this incredible fairy tale ! 
And henceforth when the wires sing softly and the wings 
groan, they sound in my ears like the tender chords of a 
harp or, when we face a strong and rising head wind, as 
if someone were playing Scarlatti on a spinet! Now I 
can fully understand why men will starve themselves and 
work their fingers to the bone for months, so that they may 
save enough for a few weeks' soaring in the Rhon country. 
It is a return to romance from the days when 500 h.p. 
engines propel comfortable flying ships through the air 
like taxis.
And now we find ourselves in the best of good company. 
The unbelievable becomes the event, and we climb up till 
we join the masters of soaring flight who have been circling 
above us for hours in the remote silence. Earthbound, I 
had watched them longingly from the Wasserkuppe for the 
whole morning prior to my start. All the " experts " had 
declared it sheer madness for us to contemplate attaining 
such a height in our heavily laden craft.
Nearly all the high-grade one-seaters have to-day under- 
taken an attack upon the endurance record, but a favourable 
upward breeze and my pilot's fabulous skill have raised 
us up to the same height as the big guns of this year's 
" Rhongeist " competition and kept us there.
To-day is a world record day of the first importance : 
Kronfeld of Vienna has been sailing in his " Spirit of the 
Rhon " over the Upper Rhon for four hours and a half, 
and before he comes down he is destined to prolong his 
flight to eight hours, and so break all previous records of 
duration flights from the Wasserkuppe. Also Nehring of 
Darmstadt, Kegel of Cassel, Wolf Hirth the Swabian, 
Schulz from West Prussia, and the dainty " Hessenland " 
are circling with ever-changing luck, over the summits of 
the Rhon mountains in competition with Kronfeld ; they

--- PAGE 170 ---
SOARING PILOTS REPORT 
125
want to wrest that duration record from him before the 
end of the Meeting, if it can be done. Unfortunately, Dittmar 
of Fulda has not brought his " Albert " here on account 
of a slight accident. Five days ago he attained the fantastic 
height of five thousand seven hundred feet in a motor- 
less plane and thus upset all previous opinions on 
this point.
While our good soarer sails slowly against the wind, 
gaining foot after foot of height by expert handling, I 
find time to study my pilot more closely. He is Alex 
Schleicher, designer, builder and flyer in one, a second 
Espenlaub. 
Schleicher is the only native of the Rhon 
among the motorless flyers ; his home is at Poppenhausen, 
a health resort perched high up at the foot of the Wasser- 
kuppe in lovely surroundings, from which our machine 
takes its name. He learnt carpentering in his father's 
workshop ; then, as a young man, he found employment 
in the Rhon-Rossitten Gesellschaft's small aircraft factory on 
the Wasserkuppe, where his idealism and fanatical, 
indomitable perseverance enabled him to overcome many 
difficulties and made him into the well-known manufacturer 
that he is acknowledged to be to-day. His specialities are 
the two-seaters that he puts together with his own hands in 
his own workshop, and he could not tell you how many 
nights' sleep he had sacrificed to the difficult work on these 
machines. It has indeed not been easy for him, as a self- 
made man in every respect, to attain his aims, often in the 
face of many unnecessary obstacles. The Rhon may well be 
proud of the son, whose achievements we all write to 
honour !
Of the hundred flying machines entered for the Meeting, 
only five are two-seaters, two of which have hardly been 
seen out. Of the remaining three, two were built by 
Schleicher. The celebrated Krause, of Berlin, gained all 
his prizes with a machine built by Schleicher, the man who 
crouches on the pilot's seat before me with the control 
lever in his hand and his feet on the rudder bar ! 
His head 
and his hair look as if he had designed them himself ; 
he has the head of a Titus square at the top and falling 
down on either side like a pair of short wings. Two deep

--- PAGE 171 ---
126 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
furrows in his face taper down to a chin like the body of a 
glider. These are the traces left by his self-denial and 
tenacity of purpose ! 
Everything about him proclaims 
the hard common-sense which joins with his innate modesty 
to prevent the inspiration slumbering in his heart from 
finding outward expression. In short, this carpenter of 
Poppenhausen is a character like the one so finely drawn by 
Max Eyth in his novel The Tailor of Ulm, the man born 
a hundred years before his time, from whose tragic fate 
Schleicher will certainly be spared. For the tailor of 
Ulm made for himself a pair of wings which were to be 
moved by his arms ; thus equipped, he leaped from the 
steep bank of the Danube, and, falling, met his death.
Now Alex Schleicher makes a second steep turn, and we 
fly before the wind at a speed of from thirty to forty miles 
an hour, high above the mountain group of the Wasser- 
kuppe. For the first time I realize the tremendous height 
to which we have risen. At the same height, but at 
irregular intervals successful soarers come flying towards 
us, and Schleicher flies in and out of their midst at top 
speed in masterly fashion. First we meet the Viennese 
Kronfeld, and henceforth I am lost in a mere fantastic 
dream. 
Silently, like a phantom ship in the night, he 
glides past close to us. He claps his hands at us because 
we have climbed so high and now I too am moved to break 
the holy silence with a loud " Bravo ! " Then I ask him 
if he is not hungry after nearly five hours flying ; he under- 
stands every word, and his face breaks into a smile while 
his teeth gleam like two rows of pearls in the sunshine 
as he lifts his hand to show me some slabs of chocolate and 
a sandwich his provision for his record flight.
Alex told me that when the air was crowded to-day, 
for example, two hundred flights have been made it was 
necessary to be very careful when exchanging greetings 
with Kronfeld, because, hailing from Vienna, he had 
transferred his Austrian rules of the road to the air, so that 
he passed the other aircraft on the left instead of the right 
and always made his turns in unexpected directions.
In the meantime Nehring, nicknamed " Bubi," the ever- 
lasting boy, in his loudly checked knicker suit, is drawing

--- PAGE 172 ---
SOARING PILOTS REPORT 
127
near to us. A few days ago he flew fully forty-five miles 
to Tiefurt, near Eisenach, but it is obvious that he does 
not find it easy to maintain his height to-day, and as we 
fought obstinately for height over the Pelzner slope, and 
succeeded in gaining it, he has to slip by below us. Nehring 
has a pretty wit, for when I cast a triumphant glance into 
his machine from above, he called loudly, " Fat always 
floats on top ! " Truth to tell, the finely cut lines of his 
soarer are an embodiment of beauty. He seems to ride 
through the air between two razors which curve out at the 
sides and meet taperingly at each end.
Schulz from West Prussia is also out of luck to-day ; 
he has been sailing in the air for three hours in his red, 
varnished " West Prussia/' but as we approach him for the 
first time during this delightful Rhon air regatta he falls into 
an air pocket, sinks down hopelessly and, sad to relate, 
cannot recover his contact with the upper and more 
favourable air currents. As a compensation, however, he 
carries in his pocket the certificate of his Rossitten Duration 
Record of fourteen hours. The day before yesterday, 
Captain Kohl, who is spending a few days on the Wasser- 
kuppe, was Schulz's passenger in the " Cothen," but they 
did not have as favourable a wind as I am enjoying to-day 
but were forced to land after quite a short flight.
Now the slender " Hessenland " comes sailing some 
distance above us. 
She is the most graceful of them all, 
weighing, in spite of her tremendous span only one hundred 
and sixty-five pounds ; from below she looks like a trans- 
parent flounder. It is a sheer delight to watch this bird, 
which is as light as a feather. Four times are we destined 
to meet these " aces " at different levels before the hour 
of our doom arrives. But that is not yet awhile !
Now we are hovering high above the flying camp. 
I 
see tents and more tents, large and small, and suddenly 
the people between them appear to me like Bedouins, 
moving about in long flowing robes in one of their tented 
villages ; then the whole broad landscape beneath me is 
changed into a many-coloured, fantastic Fata Morgana. 
The soft warm wind plays about my body like a gentle 
massage, my blood flows hotly through my veins with an

--- PAGE 173 ---
128 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
intoxicant more potent than any bestowed by alcohol, 
while under the influence of our silent, effortless flight my 
imagination becomes here as free and wild as though 
it were bathed in champagne.
Fantastic ideas float through my brain. At one moment 
we seem to be nothing but a handful of white and brown 
shreds a lifeless mass that the breeze blows hither and 
thither as it will. Then we go into a gentle turn, and it 
seems to me as if the machine's wings were attached to my 
hips so that I can move them coquettishly backwards and 
forwards, like the crinoline frocks of an earlier age that 
swayed so gracefully to their wearer's movements. 
But 
suddenly a glance to the depths snatches me out of my 
dreams, for I see that at this moment we are exactly above 
the hut, which stands on the highest point of the 
Wasserkuppe, at a height of three hundred and thirty feet ; 
we are careering madly onward and look like clearing the 
whole range at a single leap, Down below me at the starting 
place I recognize both my cousins and a host of acquaintances, 
all of whom wave to us with touching enthusiasm, but, 
when I try to pull out my handkerchief and wave back to 
them, I cannot, for my seat fits me so closely that it is 
absolutely impossible for me to get at my trouser pocket.
Next moment there opens before me for the first time the 
deep Lutter Valley, which lies on the north-west side of the 
Wasserkuppe. I know every tree and every bush in it, 
every meadow and every pathway. At the entrance to the 
village of Poppenhausen stands the farm of my grandfather, 
unchanged through many generations. All the long holi- 
days of my childhood I, a town child, spent on this farm 
in this Rhon country, and those were the happiest weeks of 
my life. Not far away from it in the same Lutter Valley 
I can see the great bleaching meadows on which the Rhon- 
land house linen was bleached before my grandfather took 
it to the fairs of Frankfurt, Aschaffenburg and Bamberg. 
For my grandfather was a Rhonland farmer and also a 
linen merchant.
But now comes the strongest impression of the whole 
flight. We are just hovering over the great meadow between 
the Wasserkuppe and the Pferdskopf, which lies nearly

--- PAGE 174 ---
SOARING PILOTS REPORT 
129
three thousand feet high and belongs to an uncle of mine ; 
nearly a generation has gone by since I was first allowed to 
take part in what became later the greatest event of each 
summer holiday the haymaking on the Wasserkuppe. 
Mowing is troublesome work up here, and the drive back to 
the valley with the heavily laden carts is a dangerous 
proceeding. The heaps of stones which we gathered as 
children are still visible on the boundary ; when I was 
nine years old, I lay for the first time all day long in the 
grass here, and there I saw the very first gliding flights. 
The Darmstadt students who suspended themselves in the 
air in primitive apparatuses, had to swing themselves aloft by 
running ; and I believe that one of them was Freiherr von 
Lossl, who was afterwards killed in a gliding accident, 
and over whose memorial stone we have just flown. Those 
first short gliding flights down the slope excited our youth- 
ful imaginations ; 
we dreamt of soarers who passed 
noiselessly through the air and saw the sky full of flying 
ships. In my soarer I shut my eyes and dream once again 
my boyhood's dream ; then I open them, and the dream 
has become a living reality. Seven giant soarers are gliding 
through the air, while the meadows round about me are 
specked with small school gliders, that look like great 
white flowers blooming on the green slopes !
We do not quite reach the Pferdskopf, that mighty 
pyramid which some god built as a proud and free buttress 
to the long-drawn range, for during our mad flight before 
the wind we have lost height considerably. And now comes 
something quite delightful. We have been riding for a 
little while upon a small cloud which galloped along the 
mountain slope beneath us and flung a phantom shadow 
that wandered with us down into the valley. But now the 
cloud flings off its proud rider, and we turn again into the 
wind above the bowl of the Gersfeld valley ; our speed 
decreases but an upward current enables us to rise somewhat. 
We fly above the road from the Wasserkuppe to Gersfeld 
at a height of six hundred and fifty feet, and I see this 
remarkable road with its long loops lying before me like 
the petrified curves of a whip lash.
We circle for a little while longer, but while I am still
K

--- PAGE 175 ---
130 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
busy with these sensible reflections my lovely fairy tale 
draws abruptly to an end. Near the source of the Fulda 
the upward current suddenly fails us ; something which I 
cannot see, though I can feel it, sucks at us and drags us 
down like a lift. Alex Schleicher shouts to me that he is 
going to land, and already we are gliding down steeply 
towards the starting place. 
Close above the ground he 
catches the machine up, flutters gently along for a few yards 
and then settles down upon the meadow as naturally as a 
butterfly upon a flower.
I cannot speak about my impressions of this experience ; 
I am dazed when I think of them, and I suppose it is an 
adventure that can only be granted to me this one time in 
my life. 
I have made ascents in free and captive balloons, 
and I have flown on many routes in all the better-known 
types of machine of the German Luft Hansa. 
Stormy 
flights in all kinds of weather and even forced landings 
are not unknown to me ; moreover, I have looped the loop 
several times with Germany's most famous war-bird and 
stunt pilot, Ernst Udet, and have flown all round Schleis- 
sheim Castle with the wheels on top and my head 
pointing earthwards. After some meeting or other Raab 
and Katzenstein once took me with them on one of their 
mad bouts of stunt flying, and we rolled and looped to our 
heart's content. 
I have often been asked which of all my 
experiences in the air has made the very strongest impression 
upon me, and till now I have always answered that it was 
a perpendicular spin with the engine opened full out, when 
you could no longer breathe, because at this velocity of over 
three hundred miles an hour the air seems to become as 
thick and hot as molten lead ! 
But from now onward I 
shall unhesitatingly say that it was a soaring flight from the 
summit of the Wasserkuppe over the Rhon !

--- PAGE 176 ---
SOME FLIGHTS OF MY OWN
I
MY RIDE WITH THE THUNDERSTORM
T
HERE was no specially good flying on the morning 
of that third day of the Rhon Soaring Olympiad of 
1929. In spite of the unfavourable south-east wind 
everyone started for the altitude prize, which was the chief 
competition for the day. We had a lot of trouble on the 
south-east slope of the Eube ; often we found ourselves 
rising up, and then came a downward gust of wind from 
the Feldberg which flung us about wildly. The conditions 
were anything but pleasant, in fact, I found them so little 
to my liking that I landed after a comparatively short 
time.
Shortly before midday I was sitting in my machine, 
ready to try again, when a cry of horror went up. One of 
our friends had gone down in a spin and crashed into the 
Eube forest before the eyes of all the spectators. To get 
out of another man's way he had gone into a steep turn, but 
at that very moment a violent gust caught his wings, and 
he was not high enough up to get his machine under 
control again.
That sort of thing gets on one's nerves. I spent several 
hours with my friend who had fortunately escaped without 
injury. But the whole affair came as a shock to me and 
more or less spoilt my mood for the day. I had no inten- 
tion of flying again, but shortly after three o'clock I went out 
to see what was going on. Some competitors came rushing 
up to tell me that Hirth was hanging more than three 
thousand feet above us, right in front of a splendid wall of 
thunder clouds. " It will be too late for me," I said to 
myself ; but nevertheless I wandered on to the summit, 
thinking that there would perhaps be time for me to have

--- PAGE 177 ---
132 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
a shot at the second prize of the day before the rain came. 
It was a competition for the best short-distance flight, the 
goal being the adjacent summit of the Ehrenberg.
The wind had dropped dead, and as I fastened my 
parachute belt, I felt that I must appear somewhat ridiculous 
in the eyes of the spectators for using one in such calm 
weather. Nevertheless, I packed myself and it into my 
gallant " Wien," which was barely able to contain us both.
While I waited to start, the windspeed indicator at the 
starting place pointed with consistent malice to zero. The 
storm approached and I felt certain that it must bring the 
wind I needed. But not a breath stirred the air.
The first heavy drops fell, and the numerous spectators 
fled, but still there was no wind. At last there came a gust ; 
from six feet the windspeed indicator moved to eighteen. 
It dropped back to six, and then rose to twenty-four, where- 
upon I gave the word of command and flew off towards the 
Ehrenberg in a rising wind.
The altimeter rose so steadily that I deemed it unnecessary 
to tack over the slope. Up and up I soared, and when I 
reached the Ehrenberg I had attained a considerable height, 
though I was still some distance below Hirth. Then I 
turned and saw the whole thunderstorm front, which had 
been held up slightly by the elevation of the Wasserkuppe. 
Above me flashed the lightning.
It was a scene of wondrous beauty. The High Rhon 
lay before me as I hung waiting. The storm was overtaking 
me at a rapid rate, and I wondered whether I should be 
able to maintain my position before it.
At first it looked as if I would succeed in doing so. The 
mass of the Rhon mountains hindered the development 
of a regular front, but in the valley between the Wasser- 
kuppe and Milseburg ragged clouds were rising rapidly 
so that any moment I might expect to find myself in the 
heart of the storm. Meanwhile the machine continued 
to soar, thus indicating the solution of my problem, for 
if it were possible to rise above the storm, it would also be 
feasible to fly along with it.
It was not exactly a comfortable situation, as there were 
far too many gusts for my liking. The machine was

--- PAGE 178 ---
SOME FLIGHTS OF MY OWN 
133
violently shaken and flung about. The speed indicator 
ceased to function correctly when the first heavy shower 
came, and my glasses were dimmed by the rain, so that 
I had to discard them as useless. I was high enough up 
to feel the cold ; regretfully I thought of the jacket I had 
left behind me down in the close, thundery heat. But at 
the moment I hardly noticed its absence as there was far 
too much to do and to consider.
I realized at once that for me there was to-day no question 
of a flight along the slopes, which had now dwindled into 
insignificance. This time my slope was the front of the 
storm which assumed with ever-increasing rapidity the 
form of a mighty roller.
This first stage of the flight was literally a race with the 
storm. The altimeter rose to six thousand six hundred 
feet and higher ; as I flew over Geisa I gradually gained 
a bird's eye view of the whole front, which stretched from 
west to east and moved northwards at a tremendous speed. 
Beneath me I saw groups of little white clouds forming like 
clusters of grapes ; these showed me where the wind blew 
upwards. At a slant behind me lay the white roller, but 
I was still rising. To the north the country lay bathed in 
sunshine. Looking backwards, I sometimes saw villages 
reappearing behind the storm through the dark grey veil 
of the rain which followed it. In less than an hour I was 
high above Berka.
I had now flown somewhat in advance of the storm and 
waited for it to catch up with me. But it failed to do so, 
and, somewhat uneasy, I turned and flew along the wall, 
at first towards the north-west. I learnt later that Hirth 
had also flown in that direction. Soon I reached a curiously 
rounded cloud peak which lay beneath me. Looking 
closely, I saw that it was motionless. 
I turned, and 
realized, to my dismay, that the thunderstorm was split 
in twain. One half, which was dying down, moved to 
the west, which had hitherto been my course, while the 
other was heading eastwards in the direction of Eisenach 
and had already become wrapped in mists. 
Over Berka 
the weather was fine again.
If I can only manage to cross this gap, I thought, I

--- PAGE 179 ---
134 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
can fly on. Again I flew over Berka, but this time I en- 
countered a downwind. I pushed the stick slightly, and 
the machine gained way. It seemed as if I might still 
overtake that half of the storm which was wandering off 
eastward. The split had somewhat spoilt the splendid 
frontage ; before me hung several black clouds which I 
strove to avoid. Then all at once everything grew strangely 
misty about me, as I had so often known it to do when 
sudden fog developed over the Kuppe.
It grew darker and darker, and suddenly I was in the 
midst of a thick white mass, so that I had the discomfort 
of flying blind. The speed indicator had swallowed water, 
and the whole machine dripped with moisture. I tried to 
steer my course by the compass ; for a while I was successful, 
but eventually the needle's movements grew feeble, and 
then it suddenly started revolving madly. From time to 
time a sharp gust drove the water out of the speed indicator's 
tube and the pointer began to function again quite gaily. 
Suddenly it jumped to forty ; to fifty ; I pulled my stick 
but still it rose ; I pulled harder, and yet my pace increased. 
The wind howled round the Vienna, setting all her joints 
creaking. 
I was pressed with violence against my seat's 
back, and though I pulled the stick right against my body, 
I could not decrease the speed. At that moment I was 
truly thankful that I had brought my parachute, as I had 
never before known such a strain on my machine.
All of a sudden the speed indicator went back to zero. 
I pushed the stick over but it seemed an eternity before I 
felt myself moving again ; then like a dream picture, 
fields and villages emerged from the whiteness and described 
circles, far below me. But a second later the curtain was 
drawn again, and so I flew onward for a seeming eternity. 
At last, however, I suddenly found myself once more in a 
normal position close under the base of a cloud. Eisenach 
lay beneath me.
I had again approached the storm front, which, as far 
as I could see, stretched away eastward. Far below me 
I then saw the last foothills of the Thuringian Mountains, 
around which I knew that I had to fly.
Soon a big town lay beneath me I knew that it must be

--- PAGE 180 ---
THE PILOT'S SEAT IN THE " WIEN
Facing page 134

--- PAGE 181 ---
f'iO. 
PUPILS PRACTISING OVER LKVKL GROUND
Facing pagf 1

--- PAGE 182 ---
SOME FLIGHTS OF MY OWN 
135
Gotha. 
I felt sure of it from my memories of what I 
had studied in my maps. Gradually I ascertained how far 
before the front I could keep my machine without losing 
height or exposing myself to over-violent squalls, and flew 
onward for a whole hour, keeping a south-easterly course.
I now began to feel discomfort from the water that had 
rained down on my hair, head and neck during the previous 
heavy showers. My teeth chattered audibly. How long 
was this flight to go on ? 
It went on regularly and steadily. 
Such minor troubles, I thought, must often occur to pilots 
who fly long distances overland in power-driven machines, 
and so I held on my course to the south-east.
Often mighty clouds gathered in front of the rain storm, 
I flew round them but was sometimes compelled to push 
through them. However, I soon found that I was managing 
this blind flying better than at first.
As far as I could make out, the towns over which I flew 
must have been Erfurt and Weimar, but I am not sure. 
Then the front bent sharply to the south. It was already 
late. Visibility was bad and grew steadily worse. Dark- 
ness fell and I began to think about getting down. Wide 
plains stretched before me partially wooded ; I was over 
unknown country. I knew that the storm behind me must 
follow and therefore I looked out for some building where 
I might conceivably find shelter for my machine after 
landing. A town came into sight, with a fine field for 
landing just outside it and a big factory close at hand. 
I 
dropped down a bit and examined the whole situation 
carefully once more. The flags of a Gymnastic Festival 
which was being held there gave me an excellent idea of 
the wind's direction, and I could hear the shouts of the 
people. After a short glide I landed in Hermsdorf, not far 
from Gera, and nearly ninety miles from the Wasserkuppe.
II
A BLIND FLIGHT IN A SOARING PLANE
The Olympiad was drawing to its close. 
As regards 
the science of flight, it had taught us something new as

--- PAGE 183 ---
136 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
Hirth's and my own first deliberate flights with thunder- 
storms had demonstrated the possibility of utilizing the 
forces of the elements. Nevertheless we were not too well 
satisfied because we knew that not everyone would be 
capable of responding to the challenge of the thunder ; 
moreover, the typical weather which this kind of flying 
demands is not very prevalent. If distance flights were 
only to be undertaken by the aid of thunderstorms, they 
would have to remain exceptional performances.
Early on " record day " no flights could be started. 
Fog lay heavy on the Kuppe, and the weather appeared 
hopeless. The fog having lifted a little, the first man 
started soon after eleven ; but I still waited a while, for 
my " Wien " climbed so well that I should have flown 
up into the low drifting clouds immediately. For almost an 
hour the others wheeled about on the western slope.
It was a glorious sight. When at last I started, a whole 
squadron of soaring planes hung at the same height above 
the Kuppe ; then they all climbed. 
I decided to overtake 
them, one after another, and outsoar them.
For a while we frolicked in close proximity, then we 
strove to climb again. From the north-west a great bank 
of cloud came drifting towards us, and some of the machines 
flew to meet the first big cumulus. Flying under clouds 
had become a normal practice, and all pilots were skilled 
in it.
Suddenly I saw two planes disappear almost simultaneous- 
ly into the deep, drifting, ragged masses. Matters did not 
look exactly encouraging, but there was not much time 
for consideration as the very next moment I found myself 
in the midst of the white milk-soup. 
Should I push down 
again ? 
It certainly seemed advisable. Of course I had 
left my parachute behind this time ! 
There had been no 
signs of any approaching thunderstorm.
The altimeter was rising. On the other hand it went 
against my flyer's pride to struggle down, so I carried on with 
my climb into the white infinity. Once more the compass 
began its strange circling movements, and the moisture 
was even heavier than during my recent thunderstorm 
flight. The speed indicator swallowed water and refused

--- PAGE 184 ---
SOME FLIGHTS OF MY OWN 
137
to function under such conditions ; 
it whistled and 
squirted, indicating from time to time the approach of 
squalls, and then relapsed into inactivity. I sat erect in 
my machine, listening into the white nothingness in order 
to sense flight conditions by the tiniest piping of my bird. 
It was a crazy business, but I carried on, thankful at last 
that I was much fresher when I started this flight than on 
the day of the thunderstorm.
I looked at my watch ; a quarter of an hour had passed, 
and I had lost all idea of time. The altimeter had been 
rising continuously, so that at least there was no danger of 
running into a mountain top in the clouds.
Half an hour later I was still flying blind ; I had to 
believe my watch on this point though the time had seemed 
four times as long. Then it grew clearer around me, only 
to darken again a few moments later. Shortly afterwards 
several violent gusts flung the machine up and down again ; 
I felt I was sitting on a see-saw. Lighter and darker inter- 
vals succeeded one another ; then came a sharp gust that 
compelled me to pull the stick, and I rose into radiant 
sunshine !
I believe that up to that time I was the first successful 
soaring flyer to rise above the clouds in a motorless plane. 
Never before had I seen the cloud ocean from above, and 
the contrast between their aspect and the conflict from which 
I had emerged enhanced the view in my eyes. 
Below me 
lay massed the cumuli through which I had flown ; between 
the two nearest was a narrow gap through which I slipped 
quickly with my machine. In this way I sprang from cloud 
peak to cloud peak, looked for holes in the cloud ceiling 
through which I might see the ground in order to obtain 
some idea of my whereabouts, and turned away again when 
some bulky fellow threatened to swoop down upon me or 
to stop up a gap. Then I set off, flying with the wind as 
far as possible without climbing through great clouds. 
From time to time I could fly a little higher, and although 
at first I tried to slip through between the cloud peaks I 
soon found myself flying calmly just above the clouds, 
for they bore me perfectly. 
So wonderful was this flight 
that for some time my thoughts neglected to formulate

--- PAGE 185 ---
138 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
a plan, but at last I decided to search for the biggest gaps 
in the cloud ceiling and endeavour to get my bearings by 
the courses of the rivers and the contours of the country 
that I could see spread out below the frame of billowy 
white clouds.
The pictures which I then saw have become part of me 
for ever. I almost regret that now all I have to do in order 
to see them again in a few minutes is to fly up in a power- 
driven airplane. Familiarity has made an ordinary thing 
of what was then a wonder, a glimpse into the land of 
dreams and fairies.
I now recognized the country beneath me and knew that 
I was approaching the Frankenwald. With my clouds 
I was sky high above the falling wind currents of the Rhon 
after a flight of over forty miles. In my efforts to recon- 
noitre my position I lost height and found myself sailing 
just above the lower clouds and close to their towering 
peaks, but later I circled in my old accustomed way under 
lonely clouds floating at a higher level. The wind was 
favourable and I saw that I could glide swiftly to the slopes 
of the neighbouring mountain chain, but soon I was forced 
to conclude that the gods of the weather had entered into a 
conspiracy against me. It grew very cold ; rain hung in 
long streaks over the landscape ; clouds, rain and mist 
made the visibility bad. How I found my way under such 
conditions I cannot tell ; in the words of the trite expression 
I " followed my nose/'
Only once I nearly lost it. A weathercock deep down in 
a valley pointed in a wrong direction, and I followed its 
advice, which led me into a maze of hills. 
Suddenly I 
felt a heavy downward gust, which made it plain to me that 
if I proceeded much farther on this course there would be 
a speedy end to my flight. 
So I made my way back, with 
much trouble, along a winding river valley, slipping down 
more and more, and emerging at last from this detour, 
which had cost me more time than I had realized, some 
hundred feet above the little village where the weathercock 
sent me astray. 
I sat in my pilot's seat as if on pins. 
It seemed impossible to reach the nearest hillside from this 
height, and in my despair I looked about me for a landing

--- PAGE 186 ---
SOME FLIGHTS OF MY OWN 
139
place. Then I saw before me, a little to one side, a hawk 
soaring high on an upward wind current. At once I flew 
to the spot ; the guidance given me by my diminutive 
rival in the air had come at exactly the right moment, 
for my big bird immediately climbed some seventy feet, 
a height which just enabled me to reach a timely slope. 
Gradually I worked my way up again and set off once more 
on my course to the Fichtelgebirge.
Unfortunately the mist was so thick about those moun- 
tains that it was useless to think of trying to fly over their 
crests. I had to drop and creep along by the foot hills 
as well as I could, and yet just this work tedious enough 
from the flyer's point of view gave me great pleasure. 
Once I raced a little local train that ran in among the hills, 
puffing heavily. Another time I hung over a small village 
to gain height, and lingered there till the last inhabitant 
stood gaping in the market-place. 
I could even hear 
their shouts rising up to me in an indistinct murmur.
But the weather was not behaving well. 
Tattered 
curtains of mist hung down to my level, some of which 
were caught and held by the forest. Down in the valleys, 
where I was now forced to fly, a gusty wind blew which 
smote upon my wings with ever increasing violence and 
frequency. But this did not disturb me much, for a little 
while before I had seen Bayreuth in the distance and thus 
gained the satisfaction of knowing that I had brought off 
a really long flight.
With nightfall came heavier rain ; the wind was squally, 
and some whirling gusts that hurtled out of side valleys 
gave me more than enough to do. I had now been in the 
air six hours, and could only distinguish the outlines of the 
nearest mountains. A high-tension wire which loomed up 
before me out of the mist and darkness, the poor visibility 
and the general gloom of the night drove me at last to land 
in a marshy meadow.
Later calculations proved that I had secured two new 
records, having beaten my own thunderstorm flight of ten 
days earlier in both height and distance.

--- PAGE 187 ---
140 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
III
SIXTY MILES ALONG THE TEUTOBURGER WALD
As was to be expected, the announcement of the Grtine 
Post prize caused great excitement in the breasts of 
successful soarers and those who still waited on success. 
Anyone harbouring designs upon this prize went to work in 
all secrecy, and consequently very little was heard of the 
many attempts to fly the sixty miles. 
Only from time to 
time came rumours that in this or that part of Germany 
a certain number of miles had been flown, or that a plane 
had crashed, or that certain aces were waiting patiently 
but despairingly for proper sixty-mile weather. That 
autumn many wonderful thunderstorms passed over the 
Wasserkuppe, many splendid cumuli invited me to start. 
Many a time, when on duty as a flight instructor on the 
Kuppe, I stood with stop-watch in hand, following the 
aerial exercises of the " C " pupils, and thought that 
surely someone somewhere in Germany was " taking off 
my beard," as we say in flyers' slang. But nothing 
happened, and I gained time. Winter came ; soaring 
hibernated. In spring I extracted my new steed from its 
stable ; on my first big flight I gained a high altitude 
which induced me to look forward to future events with a 
certain degree of hopefulness. At the same time Nehring 
began his attempts to win the great prize from Darmstadt, 
and his successes on long-distance flights far outdid 
my own.
It grew clear to me that in face of such sharp competition 
and taking into consideration the magnitude of the enter- 
prise, only the fullest exploitation of the knowledge gained 
in my soaring experiences, coupled with a careful choice 
of country, and, last but not least, an indispensable slice 
of luck, would afford me any hope of success. A study of 
the map of Germany soon showed the best neighbourhoods, 
and I cudgelled my brains as to whether I should select 
the classical German soaring region of the Rhon, Nehring's 
sphere of activity on the Bergstrasse which extended into 
the Black Forest, or seek out for myself some new and

--- PAGE 188 ---
SOME FLIGHTS OF MY OWN 
141
unknown territory. In spite of its special advantages for 
me, purely sporting considerations forbade me to choose 
the first of these alternatives.
There is always a special charm about flights over new 
regions and I longed to prove that the prize could be won 
by such a flight. It seemed undignified to choose a route 
already tried out by another man, and so I made up my 
mind to take the third alternative. The Teutoburger Wald 
was a romantic range which always had a strong attraction 
for me ; there where in olden days the Roman legions 
under the hitherto invincible commander Varus had been 
defeated, there I would fly. The Hermann monument in 
honour of the Teuton leader who had gained the great 
victory became a symbol for me.
Unhappily my first attempt, which ended miserably by 
my dropping down into a hole between two hills after 
having flown less than twenty miles, was not of very 
favourable augury. Sorrowfully I returned to the Wasser- 
kuppe after three days in the Teutoburger Wald. After 
three days of wasted leave and a night journey I was almost 
prepared to agree with those people who maintained that 
there was little to be gained by flying on these low hills 
which rose only about three hundred feet above the 
surrounding plains. Then a telegram arrived from the 
weather station there : " Weather A. i ; start at once ! "
I resolved to make one last attempt and bring my machine 
back to the Wasserkuppe if I failed. Again I spent a 
night on the seat of a railway carriage.
My sporting friends of the Teutoburger Wald had done 
wonders ; when I reached the starting place, my machine 
was ready for flight. Weather conditions, too, were most 
promising ; the wind-speed indicator showed a velocity 
of from twenty-four to thirty-six while cumuli were to 
be seen in the sky. They were not the exactly right kind 
of clouds, for they were small and tattered, but they were 
better than the cloudless blue sky of my first effort. The 
large gaps to be found among the slopes of these hills 
could only be bridged by the help of upward cloud currents. 
This fact was indeed amply proved during my flight.
On May 15, 1929, at 10.40 a.m., the valiant " Wien "

--- PAGE 189 ---
142 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
sailed off into lucky air, though at first matters did not 
look too favourable. The launching crew flung me into 
the air spiritedly; the lock keeper, who was busy on the 
ship canal below, waved to me. The good man, I learned 
later, had given orders to his men to hold their boats in 
readiness. None of them had yet seen soaring flights, and 
they were confidently expecting to have to fish me out 
of the canal. No wonder their chewing tobacco nearly 
choked them while they gaped up at the engineless bird 
that climbed so silently towards the sky.
The limited updraught surfaces of the low slopes allowed 
me no great freedom of movement. Ever and anon I was 
compelled to seek aid from the clouds floating overhead. 
At Lengrich, a most troublesome spot, I lost considerably 
more time than on my first flight ; as it was comparatively 
early in the day, the houses of the town and the sides of the 
cement factories there, which lay baking in the sun, had not 
yet gathered heat enough to give off such warm currents as 
they had done on the occasion of my former flight, which 
took place in the afternoon. For three quarters of an hour 
I crawled crab wise in uncomfortable proximity to the 
factory chimneys, which loomed ever closer until at length 
I managed to catch a cloud which carried me over the place. 
It was a piece of luck, as I was not feeling exactly happy 
at the idea of having to settle down on the lightning 
conductor of a chimney. In the same way I passed with a 
scornful smile over a spot which had nearly been fatal to me 
on the first flight and then later over one of the most 
difficult stretches near Rothenfeld, where the foot hills 
weaken the updraught appreciably. 
But the clouds were 
not very accommodating that day, and it proved impossible 
to attain genuine contact with them and sail on by the sole 
use of the upward currents beneath them.
Outside the large town of Bielefeld things became easier. 
It was comparatively simple to sail along the slopes, which 
were everywhere thickly wooded, helped by a half wind from 
behind. Many motor-cars had followed me and overtaken 
me at places where I had to linger for any length of time, 
but now I lost them altogether. Unluckily I lost with them 
the clouds of dust which they created, which were my only

--- PAGE 190 ---
SOME FLIGHTS OF MY OWN 
143
possibility of observing accurately the change of wind that 
unfortunately took place. Then I saw some fine cumuli 
puffing themselves out 
ahead of me heat clouds 
overhanging the heath. 
From the great Hermannsberg 
I tried once more for my higher contact and now succeeded 
in obtaining it perfectly for the first time that day. And 
very necessary it was, too, for beneath me the trees seemed to 
stretch endlessly ; a forest which I guessed to be some four 
or five miles broad and of incalculable length made all 
thoughts of landing impossible. I saw the Hermann 
monument in the distance and steered directly for it ; 
here I found that the hillsides sloped more gently while 
the range bent to the south.
The foothills were so steep that it became impossible 
to soar by the help of updraughts from slopes. And now 
again the cumuli proved themselves anything but reliable 
assistants for I speedily lost all the height I had gained. 
The treetops drew dangerously near ; matters threatened 
to become critical as I fell and fell. 
I turned farther 
eastward, but all of a sudden came a downward gust that 
pushed me to within fifteen feet of the branches. 
I began 
to look out for a place among them where I could buil