n.
If during a cross-country flight the power-driven aero­ 
plane is compelled to lose height, its pilot throttles down his 
engine, and dives gently, the glider meanwhile diving

--- PAGE 326 ---
GO, 
A STATIONARY MOTOR-WINDLASS
Facing page 2oO

--- PAGE 327 ---
AEROPLAXE 
Tow 
START X<>. l.
CORRECT POSITION'S : 
THE 
TWO 
MACHINES 
ARE FLYING LEVEL
r
r
AEROPLANE 
Tow 
START No. 
•_>.
THE SOARING PLANE 
IS FLYIXG TOO HIGH
AND 
Til ERE FOR E EX- 
DAXGERED 15Y THE EX­ 
TENSIVE STKAIX OX IT
AEROPLANE 
Tow 
START No. 3.
THE SOARIXG PLANE 
is 
TOO 
LOW. 
THE 
AEROPLAXE is THERE­ 
FORE IN DANGER 
OK 
STALLING 
THROUGH 
EXCESSIVE STRAIN OX 
ITS FUSELAGE.
07
Facing

--- PAGE 328 ---
AUTO AND AEROPLANE TOWING 
251
down at a speed equal to his own. The best procedure is 
then for the two machines to fly close to one another, letting 
the cable hang down in a loop between them. The two 
pilots can then watch the cable and each other. Should 
the aeroplane pilot even out and resume level flight, the 
pilot in the glider must fly in curves, as already described 
until he can resume a normal position.
As soon as the towed pilot casts off, his machine loses 
speed, because during the period of towing he has been 
flying at a pace considerably faster than his normal one. 
He therefore has no need to push the stick down to retain 
speed. The two pilots must keep their eyes on the cable all 
the time so as to be ready for emergencies in case it breaks, 
or one or other of them is compelled to sever the connection. 
When flying low or over the aerodrome, pilots must remem­ 
ber that they may have some three hundred feet of cable 
hanging down below their machines, which is liable to foul 
houses, trees or high-tension wires. It is better to cast the 
cable off in such cases and risk losing it altogether rather 
than keep it in a situation which might easily lead to a 
crash.
The aeroplane towed start has the same advantages as the 
car towed start. It renders any special terrain unnecessary, 
as any aerodrome or meadow can be used for such starts. 
It also renders pilots independent of the atmospheric dis­ 
turbances prevalent in mountainous country and saves much 
waste of time. Flights can be started and carried out in a 
few minutes ; height is gained as easily as in the car towed 
start, but such height can be increased ad infinitum, while 
the soarer can sever the connection at any altitude he pleases.
Another advantage of the aeroplane towed start is the fact 
that it does not involve the co-operation of a large number 
of persons. If the first take-off fails, there is no obstacle 
in the way of further attempts. As such flights can take 
place in practically any weather, it is a regular, recognized 
method of teaching cloud and thunderstorm soaring. The 
pupil is simply towed up to the cloud area, where he casts 
off and then attempts to soar. Should he fail to maintain 
himself in the air, he has only to land and wait for his 
instructor to tow him up again. Moreover, the aeroplane

--- PAGE 329 ---
252 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
can tow any number of sailplanes into fields of favourable 
upwind in an incredibly short space of time, thus placing 
them in a position to soar at heights which it would have 
taken them hours to reach by their own efforts. The 
aeroplane tow also represents a direct economy for the 
pupils and instructors of gliding schools as a course of 
instruction can be given in one-half or even one-third the 
number of lessons required by the old methods. Finally 
remember the fact that the soaring-pilot will find it far 
easier to land on an aerodrome than in the mountainous 
country frequented by the devotees of the older methods. 
The risks of damaging the machine on landing are therefore 
considerably decreased.
The numerous advantages to be found in car and aero­ 
plane towing have won for these methods a host of friends 
in an incredibly short space of time. There is hardly a 
doubt that they will become even more popular in future 
years.
Gliders of the years to come will acquire the habit of 
taking off from aerodromes, where the beginners will receive 
their first lessons from instructors in cars. The car towed 
start will also be used for the second stage of instruction, 
after which the advanced pupil will be carried aloft to the 
clouds by an aeroplane to execute long flights by the aid 
of thermal currents or the cold fronts of thunderstorms. 
Aeroplane towing has rendered possible the utilization of 
the warm currents to be found over large towns and will 
inspire every member of the younger generation with a 
desire to be seen soaring above his native town in a sailplane.

--- PAGE 330 ---
THE CONSTRUCTION OF GLIDING AND 
SOARING PLANES
A
S we have seen from the history of soaring flight and 
of soaring competitions, four things are needed for 
successful flying : (i) a suitable flying-ground ; (2) 
pilots with the necessary flying skill ; 
(3) favourable 
weather ; (4) good flying machines. It would be difficult 
to say which of these factors is of most consequence, but 
we assuredly must not underrate the importance of the 
machines.
By the instruction of our pupils and the feats of our 
experts certain standards have gradually been evolved. 
Similar standards apply to our machines ; again and again 
we have seen how futile it is for the novice desirous of 
learning to soar to think that he must invent some new kind 
of glider. In the last century when no such thing as a 
motor-car was to be had, he who wanted one had to build 
it for himself ; to do so to-day would be nonsense. 
So it 
is in gliding and soaring, and the beginner of to-day will do 
best to procure a finished machine of a well-tested school 
type. He who takes pleasure in building his own machine 
or is obliged to do so for reasons of economy should obtain 
the plans of such a model and construct his glider according 
to them in every detail, trusting in the many years' experi­ 
ence of well-known designers and not attempting to 
improve such machines himself.
It is possible to classify the great family of gliders and 
sailplanes in various ways. 
They might be grouped 
according to differences in construction, the purposes for 
which they are intended, or their flying capacities. The 
man with practical knowledge will probably prefer to 
class them as : school, training, and high-performance 
types.
The school type is a glider, because gliding is the first 
step towards soaring, and its most usual form is the

--- PAGE 331 ---
254 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
open girder or primary type, the pilot sitting on an 
open seat, in front. 
But, on historical grounds, the 
" Hanging Glider "J is worthy of mention ; we cannot deny 
it a certain right to existence as we know the earliest attempts 
at flying were made in this kind, and though there is now 
no question of using such a type for regular instruction, it 
still serves its purpose as a means of attracting the younger 
generation. 
It is cheaper than the primary glider, so 
anyone who only wants to make a few " hops " in the air 
and finds the slight difference in price between the two 
machines a strain on his purse, then—if that is the only way 
for him to fly at all—let him build himself a machine similar 
to those used by the pioneers of gliding. He will hardly 
learn much about flying because the control is essentially 
different from that of any other type of glider. The 
" Hanging " glider is controlled by shifting the position of 
the body, a task which requires great athletic skill and 
gymnastic training, it therefore develops these factors rather 
than actual flying capacity. The essential points about such 
a flying machine are its lack of weight (it should be light 
enough to be carried by a man) and cheapness. It must also 
be controllable and possess a gliding angle which will 
enable it to fly in any fairly normal country. As the control 
can only be obtained by means of bodily movements, the 
span of the wings must not be too wide, but on the other 
hand the surfaces must be large enough to prevent the 
machine from developing too great a speed, otherwise 
running starts against the wind and landings, in which the 
pilot's legs must replace the undercarriage, would be quite 
impossible. 
Such large surfaces in conjunction with a 
small span and weight can only be obtained in the biplane 
type. Monoplanes have been found impracticable. Owing 
to its lightness such a machine is naturally not very strong, 
but it need not be so, for it would be madness to fly a 
" Hanging " glider in any but the calmest weather or, at
1 " Hanging Glider " is the literal translation of the German " Hangegleiter " 
and is used as there is no accepted word in the English language describing that 
early form of glider from which the pilot hung by resting his forearms on rross- 
battens, with his legs dangling through a hole in the plane. 
In this type of 
glider level flight was maintained by swinging the legs from side to side to preserve 
the balance. 
The legs were also used i n place of the skid or wheeled-undercarriage 
which modern gliders possess.

--- PAGE 332 ---
68. TURNS IN AX AEROPLANE START. 
IF THE SOARING PLANE 
TURNS ON THE INSIDE OF THE AEROPLANE II DESCRIBES A
SMALLER ARC AND SO LOSES HEIGHT. 
IF IT TURNS ON THE
OUTSIDE OF THE AEROPLANE, IT RISES. 
TlIE SOARING PlLOT
CAN THUS REGULATE HIS HEIGHT DURING A TURN
Facing page 254

--- PAGE 333 ---
69. THE EARLY DAYS OF GLIDING. 
WOLF HIKTII, THE FAMOI s
SoAKEK. EXPERIMENTING WITH A HANGING (iLIDEK ON SlvIS
70. A DiFFici'LT LANDINC; IN A HANGING

--- PAGE 334 ---
GLIDING AND SOARING PLANES 
255
most, in a very gentle, steady breeze. Control by means 
of the pilot's weight becomes impossible as soon as any 
rough gusts are encountered, in which case the inevitable 
crash is bound to ensue.
As is the case with all aircraft, the most important com­ 
ponent of the " Hanging " glider is the main wing. It is 
also provided with a rudder and elevators, but they are 
rigidly connected and cannot be moved by the pilot during 
a flight. One of the most successful builders of modern 
" Hanging" gliders was undoubtedly W. Pelzner, of 
Nlirnberg, who, by dint of incredible energy succeeded in 
achieving good results with his machine in the first Rhon 
meeting. A glider which he built in 1921 had a span of 
about eighteen feet, a wing area of about one hundred and 
fifty square feet, and a weight of twenty-one pounds. This 
machine was really well built and proved a striking testimony 
to Pelzner's technical and constructive knowledge and skill. 
Other biplanes which he built had spans varying from 
twenty to twenty-three feet, surface areas of one hundred 
and fifty to one hundred and eighty-three square feet, and 
weights of thirty-seven to forty-two pounds. In all these 
gliders the pilot hung by his arms from an aperture in the 
lower wing and balanced the machine with his body. In 
the competitions of 1921 Pelzner often made as many as six 
or eight flights on one day, flying altogether from two and a 
half to three miles. This feat was, however, chiefly a 
physical one, and in any case the man who would fly a 
" Hanging " glider must clearly understand that he will 
need absolute control over his body in addition to a capacity 
for enduring hard knocks.
In the ordinary school glider or primary type the 
pilot has a seat. 
This primary is a descendant of the 
" Hanging " glider, from which, however, it differs in 
several important respects. The pilot sits in a seat, the 
control surfaces are movable and the machine has an under­ 
carriage for starting and landing purposes which generally 
takes the form of a skid. All of which relieves the pilot 
from exhausting physical work.
The experience which has been acquired by years of 
instructing pupils has shown us exactly what we have a

--- PAGE 335 ---
256 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
right to expect of such a glider. The fundamental require­ 
ments are : cheapness, good flying qualities, safety, and a 
gliding angle sufficient to secure fairly long flights over 
normal training grounds. The machine which best fulfils 
all these specifications at present, is a braced monoplane of 
the simplest form, with an open girder carrying the tail. 
For want of a better name, this fundamental type may be 
described as light-wind planes. They obtain a low sinking 
speed at the expense of a good gliding angle, by reducing 
the wing-loading.
For cheapness sake these machines must be built of 
material that is easily obtainable. The wood chiefly used 
is ordinary pine or fir, the more expensive plywood being 
employed only when absolutely necessary. The cost of 
such machines could be reduced by a system of mass 
production which would shorten the hours of work neces­ 
sary for each individual machine. Repairs must be sim­ 
plified as much as possible by standardization of separate 
parts so that each damaged part can easily be replaced, 
thus saving much time, money and trouble.
Such gliders are required to possess inherent stability. 
The beginners' ideal school machine must start, fly and land 
well without any interference on the part of the pilot. If 
he lets go of the control column, the glider must right itself 
automatically, while at the same time it should be capable 
of helping the pilot to gain flying sense by reacting immedi­ 
ately to his lightest movement. 
Special attention must be 
paid by designers to the glider's behaviour in critical 
moments, such as cases of nose-diving, stalling or side­ 
slipping. The speed should not increase too rapidly if the 
pilot pushes on the control-column too much. It should 
be possible to stall gently without immediately losing all 
control. The glider should recover from a side-slip by 
itself without diving rapidly. For all these requirements, 
the drag, wing-section and plan form, position of centre 
of gravity and the size of the control surfaces are of the 
utmost importance.
When all these conditions are fulfilled, the pilot's risks 
will be considerably decreased. If a glider has good flying 
qualities, it will generally refuse to let itself be forced into

--- PAGE 336 ---
GLIDING AND SOARING PLANES 
257
a dangerous position. Of course, anything is possible with 
beginners ; one must be prepared to see them stand the 
glider on its head, stall, side-slip or ram the ground when 
landing. The result is a crash which must not be the cause 
of inflicting severe injuries on the unfortunate pupil.
To begin with, he is strapped in, so that the greatest force 
of the shock is absorbed by his broad safety-belt. There 
must be no splinterable wooden parts for his body to fall 
against, therefore the need is for a machine so constructed 
that there are no wooden parts in front of the body. The 
cockpit must not be enclosed, and no main strut must run 
in front of the novice's head. It was not possible to avoid 
this last defect entirely in the earliest school gliders, and the 
struts in front of the pilot were nicknamed, with some 
semblance of truth, " skull splitters." Now that this 
danger has been eliminated, the belt breaks in a crash 
landing and the pilot falls on to the soft grass. The con­ 
siderable attention given to an infinite variety of such 
seemingly insignificant points has already, in countless 
instances, led to the avoidance of badly-broken bones. If, 
for example, the rudder bar is so placed that the pilot can 
sit with his legs bent, no bones will be broken by jolts or 
jars, as is the case when he sits with his legs stretched 
out.
A gliding angle of from one in seven to one in ten will be 
found suitable for most flying fields. A smaller angle 
means shorter flights, but a greater one is not free from 
danger. For flights in hilly regions, in particular, the 
gliding angle of a beginner's glider must not be too great. 
If it is to be used for instructional purposes it should also 
be built in such a fashion that it will land of its own accord 
after a short flight ; otherwise a pupil may be unable to 
bring it to the ground and find himself hovering far above 
the valley, utterly without flying experience. It is there­ 
fore obvious that both the type of glider and the choice of 
terrain are essential factors.
A splendid example of the class of glider which fulfils all 
the above requirements is the " Zogling." It is a braced 
monoplane with an open girder body, the wings of which 
have two main spars consisting of fir or pine boards set on

--- PAGE 337 ---
258 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
edge. They are cheap, and if broken can easily be glued
together again. The ribs are made as cheaply as possible.
The wing section is of the medium thick kind. The
wings are strengthened by a ply-wood leading-edge extend-
O 
g3 
oO
ES3

--- PAGE 338 ---
71. A "ZOGLING" IN THE AIR. 
NOTE THE OPEN SEAT AND THE SIMPLICITY OF THE MACHINE'S
CONSTRUCTION
Facing page 25S

--- PAGE 339 ---
'J. TIIKKI: LATTICED TAILS ix PKOCKSS OF cONSTKUCTIOX FOK
/<K;LIN<; MACHINES
THE FrsKLACE OF A LIGHT WIND MACIIINI-: 
Academic Flying Group)
(The Stuttgart

--- PAGE 340 ---
GLIDING AND SOARING PLANES 
259
ing as far back as the front spar, and an internal drag bracing 
system of stiff wooden diagonals. The fuselage or body is 
a very strong open girder with ply-wood flitch plates or 
" biscuits " either side of each important joint. This girder 
has a triangular top extension forming a kingpost to which 
both spars of both wings are braced while the lower bracing 
or flying wires run from the bottom of the girder up to 
the spars. The tail unit is braced each side to the wings 
and all the control surfaces are stiff enough to withstand 
torsional forces.
The price of such a glider is not very high. A beginner's 
glider can be bought from a good factory for as little as 
forty or fifty pounds. If you build it yourself, you save the 
expense of the workmen's time, which is, after all, a large 
proportion of the total cost. When we consider the fact 
that many people can practise with the same glider, all of 
whom would be ready to contribute their share to the 
purchasing fund or to give a few hours helping to build it, 
we see that it ought not to be too difficult for such machines 
to become popular in any country.
The glider employed for maintaining and increasing the 
skill acquired in a " Zogling " and for elementary soaring, 
is called the intermediate type. Like the school gliders, 
these are nearly all single-seaters. It is, however, desirable 
to have on hand a number of two-seaters in which a soaring 
instructor can take up a pupil for his first soaring flight, in 
order to give him a practical demonstration of the right way 
to handle a machine in an up-current and to make turns 
above a slope.
There are two directions along which gliders possessing 
good soaring qualities may be developed. The first pro­ 
duces machines with an extremely low sinking speed which 
develop into the typical light-wind sailplane with minimum 
wing-loading. The wing is greatly enlarged, but the weight 
on the other hand, is kept down as much as possible ; this 
can be done best by having braced construction. The other 
direction lies in an improvement of the gliding angle. These 
machines are built with a minimum drag, and with a 
structure and formation similar to that of the high-efficiency 
machines used by expert pilots. This type cannot have an

--- PAGE 341 ---
26o KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
open girder fuselage, on account of the large amount of drag 
it creates, while on similar grounds bracing wires must be 
replaced by simple struts.
Gliders of both these classes must naturally comply with 
the demands made on school machines. The pilot who is 
about to make his first soaring flight is by no means sure of 
himself. He is often guilty of the use of excessive control 
and liable to make heavy landings. Therefore these gliders 
must be strong and capable of standing rough treatment 
although it is not necessary for them to have the thorough 
solidity of the school gliders. But they must be able to 
behave well in the difficult situations which may arise during 
a flight.
The necessary manoeuvrability and ease of control are 
more readily obtained in the type with the heavier wing- 
loading and larger fuselage than they are in the light-wind 
sailplane. In the latter type the rudder control and some­ 
times that of the ailerons is often very sluggish. Increasing 
the control surfaces alone does not help and other aids have 
to be employed. The wing tips must be rounded and have 
a more suitable section while the ailerons can be arranged 
to work differentially, that is, with a larger upward than 
downward movement.
These various qualities of the two types of machine should 
enable us to determine for which branch of instruction 
they are suitable. If a pupil desires to learn soaring in 
order to devote himself later to flying a motor-driven 
aeroplane, the best machine for him will be the one which 
in its flying qualities most nearly approaches the motor- 
driven types. His choice would naturally fall on the semi- 
cantilever strutted monoplane with enclosed fuselage, as 
this type is relatively speedy and easy to manoeuvre ; 
moreover it can be so constructed that the knowledge 
acquired from handling it can be applied directly to motor- 
flying. From the point of view of flying, the pupil will also 
find little difference between this type and the cantilever 
motor-driven aircraft which he will eventually have to pilot. 
Cantilever machines are not therefore built for soaring 
instruction because heavy landings lead all too easily to 
breakages of the unsupported wings. On the other hand,

--- PAGE 342 ---
GLIDING AND SOARING PLANES 
261
soaring instruction in light-wind sailplanes has the great 
advantage that it gives the future expert pilot an opportunity 
of growing accustomed in good time to the sluggishness of 
the ailerons. If the glider is to be used especially for this
o

--- PAGE 343 ---
262 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
,6,S

--- PAGE 344 ---
74. 
THE ELEVATOR. 
(The Darmstadt Academic Flying Group)
75. FITTING THE Kins ON TO A ONE-SPARRED WING. (TheDarmstadt
Academic Flying Group)
Facing page ~»;2

--- PAGE 345 ---
!(}. 
\\'ixd-STui 'CTruE OF A FKIMAKY MACHINE
77. 
A SCHOOL DOUBLE-SEATER IN FLIGHT
Facing page lit

--- PAGE 346 ---
GLIDING AND SOARING PLANES 
263
kind of training, it is advisable to give the pilot the same 
sort of streamline-cockpit which he will afterwards occupy 
when he ultimately takes his place in the cockpit of a high- 
efficiency machine. Thus his transition from one type to 
the other is facilitated.
There are models of the primary type which we may 
almost term classical. The Rhon-Rossiten Ges. " Zogling " 
is the school glider which so far has the greatest number of 
starts to its credit in the whole world. The " Priifling " is 
its soaring counterpart ; anyone who has flown the latter is 
bound to appreciate its grace and the ease with which it can 
be manoeuvred in the air ; at the same time it is, perhaps, 
even more tolerant of stalling than the " Zogling." It has 
two spars to its wings and a narrow ply-wood leading-edge. 
The two spars which are in boxed form have diagonal 
drag-bracing between them, and by virtue of the two struts 
which brace the wing to the fuselage (the struts also having 
cross-bracing wires between their ends) the whole wing is 
extremely strong against bending and torsion. The ailerons 
are large and effective. The fuselage has a hexagonal cross- 
section. Along each corner runs a longeron which with 
bulkheads and diagonals completes the light but rigid 
structure. The forward part of the fuselage is entirely 
boxed in with plywood, and is specially strengthened to 
protect the pilot in case of a crash. The skid is rendered 
elastic by rubber pads attached to it at two points, which 
absorb the force of shocks, thus preventing wing breakages 
in heavy landings. The after-part of the fuselage, which is 
covered with fabric except for the bottom where plywood is 
used, merges directly into the fin which carries the rudder. 
The tail plane is braced by small struts, while the elevators 
are operated by double wires. The pilot's seat is within 
the fuselage and yet under the wing, an arrangement which 
affords him a good view and gives him the feeling of being 
himself a part of the machine. If the " Priifling " capsizes, 
he is protected by the wings.
Four short bracing struts run upward to the two main 
plane spars beneath which the pilot sits ; these are the 
middle points for the attachment of the wings. The whole 
of the section in which the pilot sits is so strongly built that

--- PAGE 347 ---
264 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
xl
-\\
H
H "b
PH 
o
§ ^
C/3
OB
\\
7
\

--- PAGE 348 ---
GLIDING AND SOARING PLANES 
265
even in a heavy crash it will remain more or less intact and 
afford him protection. The control is effected by means of 
the usual stick, while the rudder is operated by pedals. 
This glider is comparatively simple in its construction ; it 
is easy to repair and cheap to build.
A number of disagreeable qualities which the " Priifling " 
still possessed urged people to replace this machine by the 
"Falke," a machine which is far superior. 
The "Falke" 
has a lower sinking speed as well as a lesser speed in 
nose-dives than the " Priifling," the latter point being of 
vast importance for schooling purposes. The aileron 
control is sensitive, which means that the main defect of all 
soaring gliders has been eliminated. The improvements of 
this machine, compared with the " Priifling," have, how­ 
ever, made a more complicated construction necessary. 
We have to thank Alexander Lippisch, who used all the 
knowledge gained in designing tailless types for this new 
machine.
Another type, the speciality of which is a very light 
wing-loading, is the " Hols der Teufel." This is also 
wire braced, but it has an open girder fuselage similar to 
that found in the " Zogling." To lessen the drag the pilot 
sits in a small boat-shaped nacelle. The tail unit is braced 
with struts of considerable strength. The weight is very 
small and the surfaces are large. The structure is similar 
to that of the " Zogling," but it is also possible to build such 
machines with strut bracing. Their flying qualities will 
not be impaired by this, if care is taken to comply with the 
fundamental conditions, large surfaces and small weight.
The two gliders described above are merely typical 
examples of numerous machines, all of which are designed 
on one or other of these constructive principles. In the 
" Priifling " type attempts have been made to increase the 
width of the span, and light-wind soarers have been con­ 
structed with the girder type fuselage built of tubes of steel 
or duralumin. Machines of the " Zogling " type have also 
been seen with fuselages constructed of steel tubing—an 
excellent material for use in localities where material and 
workmen are accessible for repairs.
As we have already remarked, both classes contain

--- PAGE 349 ---
266 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
two-seaters which have proved their worth. The con­ 
structive problems to which they give rise are caused by the 
difficulty of providing such large machines with flying- 
controls which are in any way similar to the normal machines 
of the same type. And a two-seater soarer must be a large 
machine, if only to obtain the flying qualities necessary for 
carrying the double load. A very good solution of the 
problem is supplied by a glider, in the construction of which 
steel tubing plays an important part. The school two- 
seater, designed by Krekel, " Mecklenburg M III," is a 
braced monoplane which has been developed chiefly with an 
eye to good flying qualities. The wings are constructed in 
four parts, the inner being square ended. 
The outer 
sections are attached at the bracing points and have a 
triangular plan form with rounded tips. In the inner 
section the two spars have diagonal, wooden strut drag- 
bracing between them and in the outer section the two spars 
come together at the tips. The ailerons are large and 
extend the whole length of the outer wings. With the 
exception of the wing all parts are built of steel tubing. The 
cockpit in which the pilot and passenger sit is covered with 
doped fabric. This glider has excellent flying qualities, 
either as a single-seater or a two-seater, in the former 
case its strong point is that it has an extraordinary low 
sinking speed, and may be used as required for a variety 
of purposes.
The " Mecklenburg M III " was evolved from the 
light-wind type, but the " Hercules," two-seater, designed 
by Arnold, is a clever development of the " Priifling " type. 
It has a two-piece wing, which is braced to the fuselage by 
two parallel struts. 
On the fuselage itself the central 
section is not secured at four points but by means of two 
supports projecting from the framework. The elevators, 
unlike those of the " Priifling," are not on the fuselage but 
are located on the fin, where the lofty position shields them 
from injury on landing and has proved a most useful means 
of holding this glider while being launched.
Although the two-seater has hitherto played no great role 
in training work, it has been most useful as a means of 
propaganda. It affords a skilled pilot an opportunity of

--- PAGE 350 ---
GLIDING AND SOARING PLANES 
267

--- PAGE 351 ---
268 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING

--- PAGE 352 ---
GLIDING AND SOARING PLANES 
269
taking up many passengers on a good flying day and bringing 
them back to the place from which they set out ; such 
flights, as aforesaid, do more to stimulate interest i^i flying 
than propaganda by means of the spoken or written word.
Naturally such two-seaters cost more to build than the 
single-seater variety of the same type, since they require 
considerably more material and many more hours of work. 
The prices for a " Priifling" or for a glider of the " Priifling" 
type range from fifty-five to sixty-five pounds, and those of 
a light-wind soarer from fifty pounds to seventy-five pounds, 
but one must expect to pay about double these sums for a 
two-seater of the same type.
The ability of the constructor is more exercised in the 
building of high-performance sailplanes. It is certainly 
much easier to build a motor-driven aeroplane that will fly 
well, than a sailplane with which special flights can be made ; 
it is therefore the ambition of every constructor to do his 
best in this direction. The main objectives, which all pilots 
continually emphasize are: a better gliding angle, a lower 
sinking speed and greater powers of control. It is also 
very desirable to have a machine which can be flown quickly 
or slowly at will without impairing the gliding angle or the 
sinking speed. The design of such a machine entails many 
conditions in which an advantage in one direction is gener­ 
ally offset by a drawback in another. The further we 
progress, the more value we must set upon a thorough 
aerodynamical education, but this cannot be explained 
without pre-supposing special mathematical knowledge on 
the part of the reader, therefore it will be impractical to go 
into further details in this book.
Yet even the lay reader will perceive that all parts which 
offer resistance to the air must be eliminated as far as 
possible. This has led to the development of cantilever- 
winged sailplanes with smooth, streamline fuselages from 
which only the pilot's head projects. Nature has provided 
the best soarers among the birds with extremely narrow 
wings of the greatest possible span, moreover it has been 
demonstrated mathematically that the drag of the wings 
decreases as the span increases (for the same area). This is 
the reason for the constant increase of span, coupled with

--- PAGE 353 ---
270 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
the continuous improvement of the aspect ratio, i.e. the 
proportion of the mean chord to the span. The construc­ 
tion of such sailplanes is rendered easier for the designer by 
the fact that they are (or should be) flown only by first-class 
pilots. It is therefore unnecessary for him to allow for 
ignorance or carelessness which will put the machine into 
dangerous positions or will land it in such a way as to 
subject fuselage and wings to any greater strain than they 
undergo during the flight itself. Also, it is of no great 
consequence if the effectiveness of all the control surfaces is 
not so perfect as in beginners' machines, although this last 
factor is one of which many constructors are inclined to take 
too much advantage.
The forerunners, as it were, of these high-performance 
sailplanes were flown during the first Rhon meetings ; 
therefore I shall first discuss Klemperer's " Blaue Maus " 
and the Hannover-design " Vampyr." The " Blaue Maus " 
was a great improvement upon all other sailplanes of that 
time and is still in many respects, especially as regards 
lightness, a miniature pattern for designers. The monoplane 
wing was cantilever ; the machine had a thick wing section 
and was extremely lightly built. The wing, which had no 
internal drag-bracing, had three spars, and was perfectly 
triangulated. The total weight of the wing ribs was only 
about eight pounds. The weight of the finished wings was 
about fifty-five pounds and that of the slantingly attached 
ailerons less than two pounds each. The fuselage was 
constructed in three parts. The foremost of these, which 
was made of bamboo rods was calculated to afford protection 
to the pilot if the machine turned over. The fuselage was 
of round cross-section with the tail surfaces merging into 
the rear end. The pilot sat fairly high up in the fuselage 
above the front spar. The plane had landing skids, which 
were attached on both sides at the same points of junction 
as the wings. Each part had a streamline fore and aft 
section, while the ashwood skid was sprung by rubber 
buffers. The whole machine was covered with fabric.
This sailplane was a marvellous achievement for its time, 
but a year later the " Vampyr " revealed a form of con­ 
struction which still satisfies all the needs of the present-day.

--- PAGE 354 ---
GLIDING AND SOARING PLANES 
271

--- PAGE 355 ---
272 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
U)
5
\

--- PAGE 356 ---
GLIDING AND SOARING PLANES 
273
This unbraced monoplane of the Hanover Flieger Gruppe, 
which was evolved with the help of Professor Proll and the 
Dipl. Ing. Madelung, was the first to demonstrate clearly, 
the importance of aspect ratio. In this machine it was 
i to io.8. The wing surface consisted of a twenty-feet-long 
middle part which rested upon the fuselage and was attached 
to it by two struts. The outer parts of the wing were ten 
feet long and carried the ailerons. The wing had only one 
spar, and torsion was taken by a plywood nose. The ribs 
were built up as light girders. The fuselage had a square 
cross-section and curved upwards behind, thus enabling 
the pilot to drop the tail deeply when taking-off and landing. 
Typical of this machine were three footballs hung upon 
axles, which acted as excellent shock absorbers when 
landing. There was no tailplane in front of the elevator. 
The rudder and the fin were very large. The machine 
weighed a hundred and fifty-four pounds without its pilot.
But although the " Vampyr " was an excellent machine, 
it has been easily surpassed by the high efficiency machines 
of to-day, all of which are built to a standard form. Those 
which I am about to describe have been credited with the 
greatest successes in recent competitions.
The " Westpreussen " was designed by the Dipl. Ing. 
Hoffmann, of the Darmstadt School. Nearly all the sail­ 
planes of this type have a square middle section to which are 
attached elliptical outer planes. The wing has one spar 
and a plywood nose. The ailerons are large. The cross 
section of the fuselage is oval. In the very latest model, the 
" Westpreussen," the wing rests directly upon the highly- 
streamlined fuselage. The skid has rubber buffers.
There is a striking resemblance between the forms of the 
" Westpreussen/' the " Lore," and the " Starkenburg." 
All these three machines are from the Darmstadt School. 
The " Lore," which was so successful in Hirth's skilful 
hands in the 1929 competitions, is typical of the construc­ 
tion from this school. A small structure is erected above 
the fuselage which bears the wing. The pilot sits immedi­ 
ately beneath the front part of the wing. The body has an 
oval cross-section, tapering to a fine edge underneath. 
When viewed from the side, the fuselage is deeper than in

--- PAGE 357 ---
274 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
>*
-*-
in

--- PAGE 358 ---
GLIDING AND SOARING PLANES 
275
r- 5-
*^
H

--- PAGE 359 ---
276 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
most other sailplanes. 
Like the " Westpreussen," it is 
entirely covered with plywood over three longerons and 
many bulkheads. The hind portion tapers off into a vertical 
blade which merges into a small vertical fin. The elevator 
is located upon a small tailplane built into the fuselage.
A cursory glance would hardly disclose any differences 
between the " Starkenburg " and its two predecessors. 
But the wing section is different, as is also the attachment 
of the wing to the fuselage, the construction of the skid and 
some details in the arrangement of the control surfaces. It 
is undoubtedly a better-made machine, but its most inter­ 
esting point is the coupling of the rudder and ailerons in 
such a way that they work together without intervention 
from the control column. This coupling system has already 
been used in the " Konsul."
The successful sailplane " Luftikus," constructed by O. 
Hohmuth, is a development of the old " Vampyr." Looking 
at it, you think you have before you an improved " Vampyr/' 
The wing is in three sections, with one spar, a straight 
middle section and triangular outer sections. It rests upon 
a fuselage neck and is braced against the upper surface of 
the fuselage by two steel tube struts. The fuselage itself 
is covered with plywood ; the cross-section of the front and 
rear parts are respectively hexagonal and rectangular, the 
latter tapering into a horizontal blade which carries the 
elevators. The rudder is conspicuous by its high, pointed 
shape. The advantage of this type is that it is compara­ 
tively easy to build and combines cheapness with efficiency.
Alexander Lippisch struck out a line of his own when 
he designed the " Professor " for the Rhon-Rossitten Ges. 
This sailplane is intended to provide pilots who have passed 
their " C " test, with a machine upon which they can train 
for transition to sailplanes of the high-efficiency types. 
Solidity of construction is achieved by the struts which 
brace the rectangular middle section of the wing. The 
outer sections of the wing are triangular in plan form.
The wing has one main spar and a light auxiliary spar, 
while the struts take the torsion in the centre portion. The 
fin emerges from the rear end of the hexagonal fuselage, 
while the elevator has no stabilizer or tailplane. 
I made

--- PAGE 360 ---
GLIDING AND SOARING PLANES 
277
O 
tf
! /w

--- PAGE 361 ---
278 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
some successful flights in the " Rhongeist," a sailplane of 
this type, in 1928 and so brought it into notice.
The sailplane which has hitherto proved most successful 
is the " Wien," with which three world's records for 
distance flights and two for height were achieved in 1929. 
It was designed for me by Alexander Lippisch and Emil 
Pohorille. In this sailplane certain constructive ideas 
emanating from the " Professor " type are cleverly devel­ 
oped. The aspect ratio is i to 20. The wing area is the 
same as that of the " Professor/' but the span is sixty-three 
feet. To reduce weight, the wing is built in two parts 
instead of the usual three. It is rectangular in the middle 
and tapers sharply towards the tips. The ailerons are 
unusually large. Each plane has one main spar, with an 
additional light auxiliary rear spar, and is braced by Vee 
struts. The fuselage has an oval cross-section. As in the 
" Professor," the elevators are carried upon a revolving steel 
tube spar, which projects from each side of the fuselage. 
The special care bestowed upon the construction of this 
machine has made it practically the best and most reliable 
that has yet been built. In spite of its span and light weight 
it has repeatedly withstood exceptionally heavy stresses, 
many of which were far greater than those attained in normal 
soaring flight. Its flying qualities are equally good in stormy 
weather or in the lightest breeze in which it has been found 
possible to fly.
The " Fafnir " is worthy of special notice on account of 
the successful flights and records which Groenhoff made on 
it during 1930 and 1931. This design of Lippisch's was 
built especially strong and is therefore heavier than other 
high-performance sailplanes. The wing is cantilever. The 
wing section, Gottingen 652, becomes symmetrical towards 
the tip, the angle of incidence diminishing noticeably. The 
ailerons are very large. The small middle section of the 
wing is directly attached to the fuselage. Each plane has a 
marked dihedral angle near the centre section, while the 
outer portions are set at zero dihedral, although on the 
ground the planes appear to droop giving the machine the 
appearance of possessing a negative dihedral angle. The 
pilot's cockpit is completely enclosed, leaving only side

--- PAGE 362 ---
78. 
THE " RIIOXADLER," A DOUBLE-SEATER CONSTRUCTED BY ALEX LIPPISCH
Facing page 2

--- PAGE 363 ---
79.
Facing page 279

--- PAGE 364 ---
GLIDING AND SOARING PLANES 
279
a
&
Jf* 
~" :—
3
Ifc 
-c,
tt

--- PAGE 365 ---
52MO"
PROFESSOR

--- PAGE 366 ---
GLIDING AND SOARING PLANES 
281
openings for his view. The " Fafnir " is equipped with a 
full set of instruments for blind flying such as Turn and 
Bank indicators. The fuselage and tail units are normal. 
Amazing controllability, which is far ahead of that of any 
other sailplane, has been obtained in this machine.
The prices of sailplanes naturally vary with their types 
and qualities. It is hardly possible to estimate beforehand 
what a new plane will cost, as so much depends upon the 
quality of the materials used and the peculiarities of its 
construction. While, for example, a machine with a large 
rectangular middle wing section needs a large number of 
ribs of equal size, the light firm tapering wing requires 
many more hours of work for the production of its in­ 
numerable ribs of different sizes. The employment of 
lightened stampings or " electron " fittings instead of steel 
ones saves weight, but is expensive. Hence the prices of 
the high-efficiency sailplanes which I have described above, 
vary from £150 to £300, the cheapest being the " Pro­ 
fessor," while the " Wien " or the " Fafnir " is the most 
expensive. Between these lie the " Westpreussen," costing 
£190, and the " Elida," costing £200.
These prices do not include the instruments which are so 
necessary for modern expert flying, such as the air speed 
indicator, altimeter, compass, barograph, and the variometer 
which is an instrument that indicates the climbing and 
sinking speeds. The price of a parachute is likewise not 
included, but it is most advisable to carry one in a sailplane 
used for difficult thunderstorm and cloud flights.
An essential for pilots undertaking cross-country flights 
in high-efficiency sailplanes is a trailer upon which the 
machine can be brought home again. These are of different 
types, the most usual being the two-wheeled trailer which 
can be towed by a powerful motor-car. To protect their 
contents from rain and dust these trailers have canvas covers.
All this additional equipment increases the expense 
considerably, often by more than half of the actual price 
of the machine. Finally, there is the licence fee, for it 
will readily be understood that such high-performance 
sailplanes can only be entrusted to pilots possessing very 
high qualifications.

--- PAGE 367 ---
KRONFELD'S WIEN

--- PAGE 368 ---
GLIDING AND SOARING PLANES 
283

--- PAGE 369 ---
284 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
Every sailplane factory has developed a family of its own 
types. Among the German ones let me quote those of, 
undoubtedly, the largest sailplane and glider factory in the 
world. This is the former " Kegel Flugzeugbau " in 
Kassel which has now been taken over by Fieseler, the 
German stunt pilot. The most important point regarding 
the products of this firm are the low prices, which have been 
made possible by the splendid organization of the works. 
Besides machines similar to the " Zogling " and " Priifling," 
and the two-seater " Hercules " which I have already 
described ; two types deserve special mention, namely :— 
the " Kassel 20 " and the " Kassel 25." The only differ­ 
ence between the two machines is the wing, which is 
mounted on the same fuselage with the same controls. 
The " Kassel 20 " has a span of 46 ft. 2 in. and a length of 
21 ft. i in. ; a maximum chord of 3 ft. 9 in. and a wing area 
of 165.75 S(l- ft- 
The weight, empty, is 225 Ib. 
This 
machine can be called a further development of the " Priif­ 
ling, " with differential control provided for the ailerons.
The " Kassel 25 " only differs as regards the span, which 
is 59 ft., the wing, however, possesses the same chord as the 
" Kassel 20 " making the wing area 166.75 S(l- ft- The 
weight empty is 230 Ib., and this is surprisingly low. 
During the Rhon competitions of 1931 this machine showed 
good flying qualities which might be accounted for, to a 
large extent, by the differential control of the ailerons. It 
is, at all events, an outstanding example of a high-class, and 
at the same time not too expensive, sailplane. The price 
of the " Kassel 20 " is £49, in Germany ; and that of the 
" Kassel 25," £78. This deserves special mention as 
nothing is more important for the popularization of soaring 
flight than keeping the price for the products of reliable 
firms as low as possible.
I imagine that I have said sufficient to indicate the 
direction in which we may look for further development in 
the building of high-efficiency sailplanes. I myself find 
the questions connected with this development so deeply 
interesting that I have not been content with seeking for 
new ways of actual flying, but have also occupied myself 
with the design side in the hope that I might be lucky enough

--- PAGE 370 ---
GLIDING AND SOARING PLANES 
285

--- PAGE 371 ---
286 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
to make some contribution to the development of the sail­ 
plane of the future. I worked on the theory that any 
marked improvement in efficiency could only be through a 
proper wing section in conjunction with a suitable span and 
aspect ratio. Careful calculations have shown that an 
increase of these results in a decrease of sinking speed, a 
better gliding angle, and a greater range between maximum 
and minimum flying speed, while at the same time it helps 
towards he attainment of greater stability. Such innova­ 
tions will greatly increase the chances, on a cross-country 
flight, of reaching many up-currents which could not be 
reached by sailplanes of another type, and also of soaring 
in districts where the up-currents would be too light for 
other machines. My latest machine which Dr. Kupper, of 
Munich, the designer of the " Kakadu," designed for me 
on these principles and which was built by the " Fieseler 
Flugzeugbau " at Kassel, should show a thirty per cent, 
all-round improvement in flying qualities. This is a 
remarkable achievement in view of the fact that the differ­ 
ence in quality between the other sailplanes at present in 
use is practically negligible, even those which show the 
best practical results being but little superior to their rivals.
The argument against such an increase in span over the 
dimensions which have hitherto been proved feasible is, 
of course, that it will inevitably increase the difficulties of 
flying. Naturally both the danger of crashes and the 
expenses are considerably increased, but all such drawbacks 
can be overcome by increased flying efficiency. It is a 
mistake to expect only the beginners to learn ; expert pilots 
must also train themselves to fly these special machines.
This latest machine of mine, which came out in the spring 
of 1930, has a span of 99 ft. The wing has very pointed 
tips and a pronounced camber ; it is built in four parts. 
The ailerons run the whole length of the wing-surface. 
To obviate any possibility of jamming which might be caused 
by the great flexibility of this cantilever wing, the ailerons 
are divided into six flaps and are operated separately. 
Like the rudder and elevators, these are constructed of steel 
tubing covered with fabric and hinged on ball-bearings. 
The surface of the wing itself is entirely covered over with

--- PAGE 372 ---
80. 
THE " KAKADU " FUSELAGE ON THE SLIPS 
(Munich Academic Flying Group)
81. THE TRIPARTITE. ONE-SPARRED WING OF A 
HIGH-EFFICIENCY MACHINE
Facing page 280

--- PAGE 373 ---
A COMPETITION ON THE WASSEKKUPPE. 
ON SUCH OCCASIONS AS MANY AS TEN MACHINES MAY HE
SEEN FLYING OVER THE SAME SLOPE
Facing page '2S7

--- PAGE 374 ---
3C
°S 
n>
3
o
O
3
rf Q-0 
O co
3 S>^
P >-h _t
9 ^ £ 
% f-
COMPARATIVE SIZES OF WELL- 
KNOWN SAILPLANES
VAMPYR
WIDTH OF SPAN 41' 5'
WESTPREUSSEN
WIDTH OF SPAN 52' 8"
KRONFELD *S WIEN 
WIDTH OF SPAN 63'
KRONFELD*S GIANT SAILPLANE
AUSTRIA 
WIDTH OF SPAN 98' 10"
erg
gg
o 3 
P o 4j
3 2.5 O
?£ 3 ^
g-OQ K-. 
__
w tr D
5 O
§S
53-

--- PAGE 375 ---
KRONFELD'S GIANT 
SAILPLANE 
" AUSTRIA "

--- PAGE 376 ---
GLIDING AND SOARING PLANES 
289
in opposite directions by means of pedals, and thus to have 
an exceedingly effective air brake which enables the machine 
to be landed in restricted spaces in spite of the immense 
wing span, with the consequent flat gliding angle.
Another novelty in this sailplane is the variable wing 
camber. This is obtained by an arrangement of the con­ 
tinuous flaps, enabling them all to be raised or lowered 
together.
It yet remains to be seen what this machine will achieve. 
In every way it is an experiment, the cost of which shows an 
enormous increase over that of earlier sailplanes, amounting, 
in fact, to four times that of the " Wien." I am, therefore, 
more or less justified in expecting that the achievements of 
this soaring giant will surpass those of its forerunners.
The construction of gliding and soaring planes is work 
which requires great experience, special talents and much 
knowledge. A whole book could be written about the 
experiments and successes in this department. One thing 
is certain, however, that if the development of the instru­ 
ments upon which the flying virtuosi play, keep pace with 
the latter's own ability and knowledge, soaring flight still 
holds many surprises in store for us.
u

--- PAGE 377 ---
WEATHER, WIND AND CLOUDS
O
NE of the most interesting of natural phenomena 
is the weather. 
Weather lore (meteorology) is a 
comparatively youthful science.
This seems to be a contradiction in terms because the 
human mind always gives its first attention to those problems 
which stimulate it most. But the fact is that the most 
important manifestations of the weather present such 
extraordinarily difficult problems that we have only just 
been able to make efficient researches concerning them. 
Fleeting as the wind are all the consequences which it 
brings with it ; moreover, before the discovery of flight 
it was hardly possible for us to force our way into the king­ 
dom of wind and weather—the air ocean—in order to 
weigh and measure it.
Soaring flight has done its part in showing the need for 
intense research. It spreads the knowledge of weather 
lore far and wide because everyone who is in any way 
connected with it realizes how dependent upon the weather 
and its laws we actually are.
Various kinds of meteorological research are to be 
differentiated according to the sphere of their operations. 
The latest branch of meteorology is that pertaining to 
flying, which has become of the utmost importance for 
aerial traffic. The aspect of meteorology which I wish to 
discuss here may be termed the meteorology of soaring flight, 
so that this chapter will only deal with the phenomena 
which are of immediate importance to us soaring pilots.
A knowledge of the laws of heat and motion will enable 
us to understand weather phenomena.
We owe the warmth of the earth's surface to the varying 
degrees of heat emitted by the rays of the sun. Everyone 
knows that when the sun beats down on an open, bare 
dune or moor we find the wood to which we turn for 
refuge pleasantly cool ; it is hot in the cornfields, cool on
290

--- PAGE 378 ---
WEATHER, WIND AND CLOUDS 
291
01H
fc 
H 
tf
OQ
tf
H

--- PAGE 379 ---
292 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
the water. The warmth imparted by the sun to the earth 
differs in its nature according to the latter's characteristics, 
and the earth imparts its heat to the layer of air immediately 
above it. This causes movement in an atmosphere which 
had previously been at rest. This movement is visible ; 
on a hot day we may see the air shimmering around a 
house wall which lies bathed in hot sunshine ; as boys 
we placed light paper parachutes in this hot stream to watch 
them float upwards. Over cool spots the air sinks, and 
thus currents are formed.
Hot air is lighter than cold. Great expanses of high 
pressure and low pressure, as the meteorologists term them,
SMOKE FROM A CHIMNEY SHOWS THE TURBULENCE 
OF THE ATMOSPHERE
are formed. Owing to the revolution of the earth the air 
within these areas of pressure acquires a rotary movement, 
and travels across the earth's surface on a vertical axis.
We must now take into account the moisture con­ 
tained in the atmosphere. 
Warm air absorbs more 
moisture than cold. This also we know from daily 
experience.
When it is cold outside, the window pane grows misty. 
What is the reason of this ? 
The warm air within the room, 
which is saturated with moisture, is cooled by contact with 
the cold glass and compelled to liberate a portion of the 
water it contains. This settles in tiny fine drops upon the 
pane and dims the glass.

--- PAGE 380 ---
WEATHER, WIND AND CLOUDS 
293
All of which is, of course, not quite so clear and simple 
in reality as it appears in this example, but it is near enough 
for our purpose.
The primary need of the soaring pilot is wind. This 
flows from the regions of high pressure to those of low 
pressure, but the obstacles on the earth's surface divert 
its even course. We can watch the formation of currents 
created in this way in the air by observing the water of 
any river with crooked banks. Even minute irregularities 
lead to the formation of little eddies, some of which remain 
whirling in one spot while others break away and wander
CURRENTSIONfDETACHED ELEVATION
COURSE OF CURRENTS MAINLY ROUND THE HILL, HENCE
LITTLE UPWIND
on with the stream. Such eddies in the air are formed 
above the earth's surface by woods, houses, hillocks and 
valleys, and thus there extends for a considerable height 
above the earth's surface a zone of irregular currents and 
billow-like fluctuations which we may call (to borrow a 
comparison from the ocean) the zone of atmospheric surf 
and breakers. If we observe the smoke rising from a factory 
chimney, we shall see it rolling along in waves, which often 
grow larger and larger until they resolve themselves into 
separate eddies. Very similar phases are to be observed 
in the cloud ocean ; these formations, which correspond

--- PAGE 381 ---
294 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
to the ocean's breakers, accommodate themselves to the 
currents. This zone of surf and breaker-like activity 
generally extends to a height varying from six thousand 
five hundred to ten thousand feet above the ground.
When the wind encounters an obstacle, it has to give way. 
If a tower or a low hill rises from the plain, the wind's 
simplest way is to go round it. If, on the other hand, a 
long chain of hills crosses the wind's course, it must go
CURRENTS ON HILLSIDE
COURSE OF CURRENTS MAINLY OVER THE HILL, HENCE
MUCH UPWIND
over it. If we keep our eyes open, we can observe these 
natural phenomena every day and note all the various 
ways in which currents are formed. In a snowstorm there 
is generally a patch free from snow behind any isolated 
obstacle, showing the path of the wind around it. From 
the course of the snowflakes round the corners of houses, 
over roofs and past any obstacle, it is possible to acquire 
knowledge which can be put into immediate practice on 
a larger scale when soaring in the high mountains. In 
summer we may ascertain the direction of the breeze from

--- PAGE 382 ---
WEATHER, WIND AND CLOUDS 
295
dust, the rustle of the leaves, or from the butterflies 
fluttering along with it.
Before a straight wall opposing the direction of the wind 
we often find small heaps of dust parallel with it in summer 
and of snow in winter. These show us where the wind is 
forced to leave the earth in order to climb over the obstacle. 
In the space between the obstacle and the heap we find a 
windward eddy, while on the sheltered side a similar 
eddy is formed. This latter is known as the leeward eddy. 
Both these types of eddies can prove a danger to soaring 
and other pilots ; if they are strong enough they can produce 
up-currents in localities where we expect down-draughts and 
vice versa.
The velocity of the wind increases when it has to climb 
over obstacles. The height to which the disturbing in­ 
fluences of a range of mountains extends and the distance 
before it at which the air currents begin to rise from the 
ground and touch it again on the farther side have been 
repeatedly observed and measured. As a rule all such 
measurements show a marked increase in proportion to 
the height of the mountains and the strength of the wind. 
Here are some approximate results of such measurements :
Height of mountain 2,650 ft., sphere of influence 
925 ft.
» 
» 
» 
4>95°» 
» 
» 
» 
I >300 »
» 
>> 
» 
8,250,, 
,, 
,, 
,, 
2,150 ,,
,> 
„ 
„ 
11,000,, 
„ 
„ 
„ 
3,300 „
A single measurement showed that a region of down-draught 
extended for a distance of thirty-three miles on the lee 
side of a mountain ridge eight thousand two hundred and 
fifty feet high and a distance of seven and a quarter miles 
on the lee side of a mountain of two thousand six hundred 
and fifty feet. The facts apply to the positions of the 
uprising currents in front of the mountains. All this is 
of the utmost importance to pilots undertaking long soaring 
flights.
If, on the contrary, the wind blows across two ridges 
lying comparatively close to one another, the whole valley 
between them is usually filled with swirling currents above 
which the main stream passes on evenly. If the pilot is

--- PAGE 383 ---
STREAM OF CURRENTS ON SLOPES
SIMPLE UP AND DOWN CURRENTS ON A MODERATE
SLOPE
WINDWARD EDDY 
LEEWARD EDDY
STEEPER SLOPES PRODUCE EDDIES TO WINDWARD
AND TO LEEWARD
10
vO
w r 
o
or
TWO ADJOINING HILLS PRODUCE SIMILAR CURRENTS
TO ONE HIGHER, OWING TO THE FILLING UP OF THE
VALLEY BETWEEN BY AN EDDY
TWO HILLS FARTHER APART EACH PRODUCE ITS UP 
AND DOWN CURRENTS
O
en 
O
O

--- PAGE 384 ---
WEATHER, WIND AND CLOUDS 
297
high enough up, the influence of the disturbance will be 
quite unnoticeable.
Similar phenomena are to be remarked on coasts. 
Whirling currents are created on the shores where the sea 
meets the land in a fashion similar to that in which they are 
formed above the mountains where the wind is forced to 
climb, but here they are caused by the difference of the 
friction between air and water and air and land. 
Pilots 
have frequently noticed this fact.
It has already been shown that clouds and cloud forma­ 
tions can indicate up and down winds. Therefore we must 
inquire into the origin of clouds ; as a rule they are pro­ 
duced by the condensation of aqueous vapour. When this 
vapour cools, its moisture collects into fine drops, as we 
have already seen. This process is called condensation. 
Aqueous vapour, as such, is invisible, but as soon as these 
fine drops are formed and hover in the air, they become 
visible in the form of mist, fog or clouds.
When warm air which is saturated with moisture rises, 
it passes into colder regions. At that height at which the 
temperature necessary for precipitation is found, cloud 
formation begins. The cloud then builds itself up above 
its base until all the moisture is condensed. Thus every 
cloud is for us a natural indicator of an up-current. On the 
other hand clouds dissolve when they descend into lower, 
warmer layers where the tiny drops of water expand again 
and become invisible. The cloud is then dispersed. 
Clouds in process of formation are round and globular ; 
those which are dissolving are ragged and straggling. These 
latter show the presence of down-draughts. 
Although the 
many varied phenomena of cloud formation can all be ex­ 
plained in this way, the variety which is most interesting to 
the soarer is the cumulus, a form of cloud prevalent on hot 
summer days.
It is essential for us to rid ourselves of any conception 
of the clouds and of cloud formation as permanent objects. 
A cloud is not a moveable piece of scenery that can be 
pushed, so to speak, across the heavenly stage ; not even 
the tiniest fragment of a cloud ever remains still, and all cloud 
matter is in a continual process of evolution and dissolution.

--- PAGE 385 ---
OO
CUMULUS PRODUCED BY WIND EDDIES
stim^-^V ^ 
. :<*->^f" ;
^&£&^&*~m&^
RETARDING EFFECT OF GROUND
I. HIGH WIND VELOCITY 
2. LOW WIND VELOCITY
D
O 
Z
O
25 
O
CO
O> 
50
HH
Z 
O

--- PAGE 386 ---
WEATHER, WIND AND CLOUDS 
299
We have seen how rising air currents are produced. 
When such a body of air is in movement, it draws up with 
it all the surrounding particles of air, and thus a kind of 
chimney is formed, which is capped at its summit by a 
cloud. As there is a continuous upflow of air, new particles 
constantly condense on the lower edge, rise and, after 
yielding their moisture to the cloud, climb invisibly 
higher. This is the thermal process of cloud building, 
in which heat is the sole creative factor.1
The second way in which the clouds come into being 
(a process frequently found working in combination with 
the first) is by means of swirling currents or turbulencies. 
By the example of smoke from a chimney we have seen how 
the air is formed into whirling currents. In this way a 
thick belt of air may be filled with large eddies whirling 
upon a horizontal axis and rolling forward with them 
across country. To obtain a clear picture of this pheno­ 
menon, let us imagine the movements of a steam roller 
proceeding along a road. If we look at it from behind, 
the roller moves upward ; if we view it from in front, we 
perceive a downward movement. In a similar fashion our 
" air roller " moves over the land, but with every revolution 
a chain of the clouds known as cumuli forms on the rising 
side. These are the best clouds for soaring purposes, 
especially when the rising branch of such a cloud meets 
a thermal chimney and is strengthened by it.
It is also conceivable that such air rollers may move 
over the land without containing sufficient moisture to 
produce condensation or without rising into a layer cold 
enough to cause it. In such a case there will be an up-current, 
which will be invisible to us. 
That is why soarers love 
clouds; they are the most infallible up-current indicators.
Clouds are formed wherever there is a strong up-current. 
When the wind blows off the sea on a long stretch of coast, 
we often observe a cloud formed by up-current hanging high 
above the edge of the land. In all mountain regions 
similar clouds are to be found in windy weather. They 
point out to us the up-current field.
1 As a matter of fact the explaining of the character of the cumulus is not 
quite as simple as described above. There are thermo-dynamic reasons for the 
condensation proceeding by its own accord when once started.

--- PAGE 387 ---
300 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
The dimensions1 of the spheres of influence exercised 
by mountains upon the movements of wind are largely 
determined by observations of cloud formation. On the 
other hand there are gaps above the downwind fields in 
cloud masses of fairly regular formation ; from the size 
of these it is possible to measure the extent of the down­ 
wind area. The sinking air is warmed, the fine particles of 
water contained in the cloud dissolve and become invisible ; 
the cloud disperses and the weather clears up. This is the 
reason why tracts of land lying on the down-draught side of 
high mountains usually enjoy cloudless and beautiful 
weather. On the other side of the mountain, however, 
where we find the up-current field, clouds are likely to become 
over saturated owing to the constant accession of fresh 
moisture from the plain below. There are then so many 
particles of moisture in the air that it cannot sustain them 
all ; some begin to sink, carrying others with them on their 
way, and fall to the earth as rain. There is always much 
rain on the up-current side of mountains. 
By means of 
annual rainfall measurements in certain places it is easy 
to ascertain where the influence exercised by the mountains 
on the wind begins, for this is the point at which most rain 
falls. We may also see in our rivers an excellent point of 
comparison with those clouds arising over mountains as 
the result of great up*currents. If a rock juts out from 
a river bank into the stream, the water will be turned aside 
by it, while behind the rock, in the direction of the course of 
the stream, a small patch of white foam forms. In the 
process of cloud formation the earth would correspond to 
the river bank, the mountain to the rock, the air current to 
the flowing water and the clouds themselves to the foam 
continually forming and dispersing at the same spot.
If we are to believe the latest findings of meteorology, 
clouds are formed on a large scale on the boundaries between 
warmer and colder bodies of air. There are mighty masses 
of cold air in the polar regions and warm air above the 
temperate zones and the tropics. Atmospheric conditions 
throughout the world are said to be affected by the inter- 
penetration of these masses of air, which do not flow evenly
1 See p. 295

--- PAGE 388 ---
WEATHER, WIND AND CLOUDS 
301
past each other but meet and interlock on their oorders 
like the teeth of a cog wheel.
We have spoken of the zones of low pressure which drift 
over the earth in the form of gigantic tracts of whirling 
air. Each of these forms together with its corresponding 
zone of high pressure an aerial pair of cog wheels. In 
every zone of low pressure formed mainly from the cold 
air will be found a wedge or section of warmer air. The 
latter rises slowly above the cold air, which exerts violent 
pressure underneath it and flings it upwards. On both 
sides of this movement clouds are engendered.
In order to obtain a clear idea of such an area of low 
pressure let us imagine a circular slab of some plastic 
material, such as clay or soft wax. Out of this we cut a 
wedge-shaped piece. Now we enclose the slab in a deep 
metal ring and fill in the gap with some softer material 
such as soapsuds, starch or some kind of paste. If we 
now press this whole model together by contracting the 
metal ring, the soft mass inside the gap will seek to escape. 
As it will be prevented by the metal rim from overflowing 
beyond the slab, it will climb up the cut edges of the slab 
and then spread itself over its surface. If we now draw 
on the surface of the slab little arrows in the opposite 
direction to that in which the hands of a clock revolve, 
set the slab rotating, and at the same time push it over the 
table from left to right, we have a rough model of such an 
area of low pressure drifting across the earth's surface.
To apply this parallel to nature we must think of the 
circular slab as cold air which, according to the extent of 
the area of low pressure, may spread over considerable 
tracts of land, sometimes even over whole continents. The 
little arrows show approximately the direction of the wind ; 
the movement of the slab from left to right corresponds to 
the movement of such an area of low pressure from west 
to east, while the material with which we have filled the gap 
represents the warm air. On the bordering surfaces between 
the cold and the warm air, that is to say, on the two cut 
edges, where the softer stuff overflows, the clouds pile 
themselves up.
In reality the conditions are such that the slant of the

--- PAGE 389 ---
302 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
inclined planes between the layers of air on the edge of 
the sector which advances first is only a slight one. Here 
the air streams quite slowly and gradually up over wide 
spaces, but when the area of low pressure has passed by, 
groups of little white clouds are formed high up. These 
cirri, as the meteorologists call them, float over the clear 
sky, and gradually a high cloud ceiling spreads itself out 
beneath them, whereupon visibility becomes bad owing 
to the increased dampness. Now the first rain clouds 
approach, the whole sky grows grey and a steady rain begins 
to fall. In the monotonous grey of the sky, cloud formations 
can no longer be distinguished. 
As soon as this first edge 
of the sector (the warm front) has passed the point of 
observation, the weather changes. We pass into the 
region of warm air ; the rain ceases, and the temperature 
grows warmer. Now the second front (the cold or gusty 
front) approaches. Cold air presses strongly under the 
warm air and flings the latter up sharply. We recognize 
this phenomenon by the fact that once again high clouds 
appear, under which mighty black cloud masses move along 
with great rapidity. The wind, which had been blowing 
from the east, south-east or south, changes suddenly to the 
west or south-west, heavy rain begins to fall and the tem­ 
perature drops sharply. 
The wind velocity increases 
rapidly and violently ; the barometer, which has hitherto 
been falling, rises suddenly ; the squall front passes over 
us, sometimes accompanied by a thunderstorm and always 
discharging heavy showers. 
Gradually the rain ceases, 
the clouds begin to part, from time to time ever-decreasing 
fragments of front approach until at length we find ourselves 
upon the rear side of the low pressure. Beautiful, grand 
cumuli move across the sky when the area of low pressure 
has passed by and made room for that of the next high 
pressure.
This exposition of weather formations is in accordance 
with the researches and theories of the meteorologists, 
Bjorknes and Stuve. They provide a basis for the com­ 
prehension of all the great weather phenomena, and he 
who has grasped the significance of our model has had 
his first initiation into their secrets.

--- PAGE 390 ---
THE TWO FRONTS AND THE WARM SECTION IN AN AREA OF LOW PRESSURE
COLO
W 
> 
H 
ffi 
w
50
^^^'^.^^^^^^^^'''^T^

--- PAGE 391 ---
304 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
As we have seen, the front which approaches on the 
first edge of the sector has only a very gentle slope ; the 
up-current on that side is therefore weak and cannot be 
turned to account by the sailplanes at present in use. 
On the other hand the up-current energies on the invading 
cold fronts are extraordinarily strong, as every flyer who 
has ever been in a thunderstorm front knows. 
It ou^ht
<3OO MILES
to be possible to soar along such fronts for thousands of 
miles. If we have studied meteorology, we can observe 
their approach and courses according to the laws of weather 
formation which I have tried to describe above, or predict 
it from weather charts. This is of the greatest importance 
for the competition tactics of the soaring pilot, because he 
is now able to ascertain when he has opportunities for a 
front flight and a normal cumulus flight.

--- PAGE 392 ---
WEATHER, WIND AND CLOUDS 
305
There are still many things that I could tell you about 
the great and wonderful region of meteorology. For 
instance, it is interesting for the soaring pilot to know 
something about the wind and the way in which it is 
measured, about the gustiness and squalliness, about wind 
staircases and periodical fluctuations. Moreover, many 
different phenomena may react on one another, while often 
different causes will produce similar effects. For example, 
there are in addition to front thunderstorms, heat thunder­ 
storms of a local character, turbulence cumuli and heat 
cumuli. Within my limits, which are those of practical 
soaring, I can only speak of such phenomena when they 
come into direct connection with our sport. He who 
desires to be a successful soarer will do well to enlarge 
his meteorological knowledge by study and personal obser­ 
vation upon the lines indicated above.
Once more we recognize that one of the finest qualities 
of soaring flight is the stimulation that it gives us in all 
directions. It creates thinking pilots, who can face the 
most difficult weather conditions cheerfully because their 
fears have been overcome by knowledge.

--- PAGE 393 ---
THE FUTURE OF SOARING FLIGHT
T
HE answer to this question is as uncertain as are 
the answers to all questions concerning the future. 
Yet if we cannot predict in detail the exact course of 
the development of soaring flight, we know, nevertheless, 
that its future possibilities are so manifold, while its prob­ 
lems extend in so many directions that it will be long before 
we can even begin to solve them.
Soaring flight depends upon its disciples, who must 
provide the new material and new power. If we desire 
to know what we must demand from them, the question 
arises : what do we expect to gain by gliding and soaring ? 
So far as gliding is concerned the answer is simple : we 
want to attract as many people to this form of flying as 
possible.
By gliding we shall provide the strength that lies in 
numbers. The devotees of gliding should include the 
whole of a nation, and more especially its younger generation; 
we ought to be able to weave a net of enthusiasm for flying 
sport over a whole country. We have already made such 
progress in this direction that innumerable groups and 
clubs are active in every country. That is not enough, for 
every small town and village should have its own training 
centre or its own gliding club. The expense is so slight ; 
a mountain or hill, with a shed on it, suffices.
The shed contains one, two, three or more pupils' 
machines, and perhaps funds will suffice to build a hut 
with simple sleeping accommodation where young folk could 
camp out in simple fashion. 
Intelligent organization 
would soon find ways to cater for their needs, so that 
soaring mountains would soon become as common as skiing 
mountains, perhaps even as golf links. Every young fellow 
would cherish ambitions to join the ranks and learn to 
pilot a glider.
For the attainment of this object active and continuous
306

--- PAGE 394 ---
THE FUTURE OF SOARING FLIGHT 307
propaganda is essential, but propaganda is not the only 
need ; machines must become cheaper, training simpler 
and flying easier. Machines built on standard lines would 
facilitate a mass production that must inevitably bring 
about a fall in prices, but it should also be possible to design 
types of machines that would cost less to build than those 
at present in use. The period of instruction could be 
shortened by the invention of gliders possessing inherent 
stability, while a development of the art of flight over level 
ground would gain recruits among the inhabitants of the 
plains. As a matter of fact it is even now possible to make 
quite good flights over flat stretches of country by using 
longer launching ropes. Launching can also be effected 
by means of catapults and motor-cars.
Thus gliding would become the first stage of practical 
flying by providing a host of airmen versed in the rudiments 
of their craft.
It is quite easy for school-teachers to make the problems 
of flight clear to their pupils by means of simple gliding and 
soaring models put together on the premises. In their 
playtime the children could master all the essential principles 
of flight. The greatest general was the man who invented 
tin soldiers, for he militarized the younger generation, but 
in the same way air traffic may one day receive its greatest 
stimulus from some child's experiments with a toy aeroplane.
Soaring must be carried on on a far more extensive 
scale than has hitherto been the case. 
Its task will be : 
to persuade as many people as possible to become good pilots.
By soaring we pick out the pilots of the finest quality. 
The choice is a quite simple and spontaneous one, as the 
unsuitable pupils are weeded out by a process of natural 
selection. This cannot be too strongly emphasized. The 
movement is still only in its infancy, and at present we do 
well to set much value on gliding flight, but it must not 
be forgotten that the real object of gliding is soaring. 
The 
more rapidly pupils pass from gliding to soaring, the more 
adherents will be won for flying, and the more enthusiastic 
will they become.
Here, too, operations on a more extensive scale will 
involve a reduction of expenses, because cheap machines

--- PAGE 395 ---
3o8 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
that can easily be flown will find the readiest sale. Veteran 
soarers and their friends who fly engine-driven machines 
will then come for week-ends to the training hill, fly for 
an hour or so, land and start again, and consequently 
we shall need many more machines capable of soaring than 
there are at present in existence, even if they are only 
gliders of the " Broomstick " type. With such it should be 
possible to make flights of eight hours duration—as 
Ferdinand Schulz did in the original " Broomstick."
Then it will be easy to arrange little competitions, 
distance flights and goal-flying practice. Groups of soarers 
could pay visits to other training schools in the same way 
that football teams visit each other's grounds to-day. 
Such matches would have a special charm for the flyer, 
because each fresh slope, each new district, offers its own 
problems and demands its own particular methods.
On long, regular mountain ranges or in coastal areas 
there are many localities suitable for flying clubs. If the 
local prevalent winds blew at right angles to the slope, it 
would be easy to fly from one club to another, land, convey 
the gliders to the hill, and fly back again—perhaps with an 
exchange of pilots.
The propagandist effect of soaring is greater than that of 
gliding, for which reason alone good soaring flying is of 
importance. There is hardly anyone who would not wish 
to do the like when he sees someone soaring silently above 
him. For such cases the club two-seater could be brought 
out, and a flight made with a passenger. One single 
day on which many interested passengers could be taken 
up in a two-seater to enjoy the experience of the start, the 
climb, the smooth flight and the landing at the starting 
place would do more to win recruits for soaring than many 
pages of writing.
It is a well-known fact that good soaring-pilots make good 
power-pilots. 
Their well-developed air-sense, and their 
flying experiences in strong winds, and in close proximity 
to the ground are all to the good. It is very unusual for