eople, to an altitude of five thousand feet, thus half 
the height we required for the flight.
At six thousand five hundred feet there was a dense bank 
of clouds over the Channel, which cut off the coast and 
over which we endeavour to climb, getting in the process 
heavy jerks in the towing cable. It was there that Krause 
apparently no longer had control over the situation. Accord­ 
ing to the report of both the pilots, there must have been 
a few really anxious seconds for both the machines, until 
Krause decided to slip the coupling and give up the first 
attempt. 
I saw him from above disappear as a small point. 
According to Krause he would have jumped if he had had 
a parachute with him. 
His effort was none the less great. 
He who knows " Hans Werner " knows that he gives of 
his best in any sport.
We therefore gently climbed still higher, and from time 
to time the ground disappeared behind the clouds. In 
the meantime, Krause again tried to gain sufficient altitude,

--- PAGE 438 ---
THE ENGLISH CHANNEL FLIGHT 
345
but had to abandon altogether after the third attempt, 
because the towing coupling had snapped.
From a sporting point of view, I thank Providence that 
the flight over the Channel, which is so simple in fine weather, 
had become a really difficult undertaking owing to its 
character as a race and the consequent impossibility of 
choosing favourable weather.
On the ground, we had had a strong east wind, but, from 
what I could feel, I think I can say that at ten thousand 
feet we had a wind in exactly the opposite direction. 
Through the hurry at the start, I had to leave a few minutes 
before the promised upper altitude wind measurement 
had been announced.
About 6 p.m. I slipped from the aeroplane, cautiously 
making certain that the proceeding could be observed from 
below.
Below me were clouds, and through the small and isolated 
gaps were the white tops of the waves. 
Half an hour 
later, nothing but clouds and water. Unless I had erred in 
my estimation of the speed of the wind, which I could only 
make from a sense of feel, I was somewhere in the English 
Channel. At last I saw a small dark point under me through 
a hole in the clouds : the Varne Lightship. A glance at 
the chart showed me that I was almost thirty degrees off 
my right course. 
Still, there was nothing to be seen of the 
coast. The sun was against me, and England still lay in 
the mist, in spite of the fact that the clouds were disappearing. 
Finally, a glittering strip appeared on the sea, which I 
took to be Dover, so I held on towards it. As a result 
of the strong headwind, I had lost more height than was 
anticipated. If I could not reach the coast, I was going to 
land the machine on the stone breakwater of the harbour, 
as gently as possible. In this way, I should have at least 
complied with the wording of the instructions—not to have 
landed in the water. There were a few anxious minutes, 
but they soon passed and I landed in the field which Miss 
Lippens, the Belgian aeroplane and glider pilot, had pointed 
out as the only landing place, the last moment before my 
start. To her, therefore, I offer my thanks for the success 
of this flight.

--- PAGE 439 ---
346 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
It had taken me more than an hour against the wind 
from the time of casting-off above Cape Gris Nez to get to 
the English coast.
To my astonishment, I met on my landing-field Krause's 
assistants, who were waiting there for their own pilot, and 
who were a little disconcerted when I appeared in the picture 
instead of him. In the most friendly manner, they helped 
me, and even lent a hand for my next take-off which took 
place shortly after 9 p.m.
Even before the take-off from Dover Hill, it was markedly 
dark, but I absolutely had to return the same day. Over 
the Channel, there again lay some mist, though the clouds 
had disappeared, and it was a peculiar feeling to fly into the 
blue-grey ; but Weichelt was still with me.
In England, we were not able to obtain the correct 
Petrol-Benzole mixture for the " Klemm," so we decided 
that Weichelt should tow me as high as his fuel would allow 
him, and then he would land by gliding. As a true friend, 
he held on right to the end. We had not even reached 
ten thousand feet, when I felt a strong jerk in the cable, 
showing that the engine was beginning to give out. I 
immediately cast loose and set off alone over the Channel. 
It was so dark, that I was unable to distinguish the lines 
on my compass any longer, but feeble moonlight shone over 
the edge of my right wing, and I took my bearings of the 
shadow with my head turned half-right. It was not easy, 
because this prevented me from keeping my attention on 
the French coast, and soon it was impossible to see anything. 
Only the moon was my companion. At last there was a 
flash below me, which I decided must be the lightship in 
the middle of the Channel. There were also other very 
small stars below, but it was difficult to distinguish from 
the whole grey outlook whether I was yet over the French 
coast. The clock showed twenty minutes since casting 
off and I was still six thousand five hundred feet up. Below 
me the lighthouses of Calais and Boulogne were sending 
out their shafts of light through the night and very feebly 
I could distinguish the landing lights of St. Inglevert. 
It must have been peculiar for those awaiting me, to feel 
that I was circling high above them, and yet they could not

--- PAGE 440 ---
89. A MOTH (CIRRUS III EXGIXE) FITTED FOR TOWIXG GLIDERS AXD USED BY 
XATIOXAL FLYIXG SERVICES, LTD., FOR THEIR DKMOXSTRATIOXS
/>// cuiirtc;:ii of " Wi<*li( *'
. / 
, / j 
^
Fttc!>'.g page 31G

--- PAGE 441 ---
fc,

--- PAGE 442 ---
THE ENGLISH CHANNEL FLIGHT 
347
see me. Then I began to spiral down, and took a long 
time, until I had lost all my height. The actual landing by 
night gave me no trouble at all.
As to the jubilations after the landing, I need report 
nothing. It has been sufficiently done from other quarters.
It was as if the era of the towed flight had now really 
begun. On the day that I flew across the Channel, Mole 
flew the B.A.C. VII " Barbara Cartland " from Maidstone 
to Reading, being towed by Mr. Wanliss, thence, accom­ 
panied by five aeroplanes, they went to Hanworth. I myself 
received while in Calais an invitation from the King and 
Queen of the Belgians to demonstrate soaring flight before 
them. In the short time available, this was only possible 
by means of a towed flight from Calais to Brussels. The 
Belgian Royal couple showed an interest in my flight, and 
a degree of kindness which was unsurpassable. On the 
Brussels aerodrome, I demonstrated both auto and aeroplane 
towing, while good thermal conditions facilitated my flights. 
It was a pity that I could not stay longer. There was a 
short demonstration the next day for the Belgian club, 
and then a journey direct to London in tow, with a short 
intermediate landing at Calais, this being the longest towed 
flight which had up to then taken place on the Continent.

--- PAGE 443 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS OVER LONDON
T
HE magnitude of any stimulation can best be learnt 
from its effect. The Daily Mail prize had, as a 
further result, my thermal flight over Hanworth, my 
flight thence over London to Chatham, and back again the 
next day. As these flights were carried out in a practically 
dead calm and over flat ground, I believe that they may be 
stated as being the first really extended flights undertaken 
purely thermally.
The first flight was an hour's flight, which I was able to 
carry out on the occasion of the great official English 
flat-country gliding demonstration at the London Air 
Park, Hanworth, so wonderfully organized by Colonel the 
Master of Sempill. Towed to an altitude of one thousand 
five hundred feet by Weichelt, I was able to sail for a long 
time in the upward current of thermal cumulus clouds. 
The only difficulty which existed was that, owing to the 
wind, the clouds drew away from the spot, and, in order 
that I might remain in sight of the public, I had constantly 
to travel from one cloud to another. When I wished to 
turn back to the aerodrome I had to push through downward 
currents of three hundred feet per minute. The lowest 
altitude to which I was forced as a result of this was one 
thousand feet, whence I could again work upwards. In 
general, I gathered the experience that, on days when 
strong upward current streams are available, downward 
current streams also appear, their speed approximately 
balancing each other.
The experiences gained from this flight I was able to 
use in my flight to Chatham on June 3Oth. 
On that day, 
there was practically a dead calm, with a light head wind 
on the latter part of the flight. 
I had originally intended, 
if possible, to soar from Hanworth below the thermal 
cumulus clouds towards London, and to soar for a long 
period in the thermal up-currents above the City. After
348

--- PAGE 444 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS OVER LONDON 349
I had been towed up by Flt.-Lt. Max Findlay in a charac­ 
teristically careful and cautious manner, in spite of the gusty 
weather, to an altitude of about one thousand two hundred 
feet above the start, I cast-off, and continued to climb 
almost continuously to an altitude of nearly four thousand 
three hundred feet. In view of the particularly lively 
cumulus activity, I was able to remain at a height of four 
thousand three hundred to three thousand feet for a long 
time, following the course of the Thames, and arriving in 
the neighbourhood of London. Just previously, however, 
I lost a considerable amount of height, and came down to 
one thousand two hundred feet, whence I was only able 
after several attempts to reach a strong upward-current 
region. This was very noticeable in the steep curve of the 
barograph. 
The climbing speed of 5 ft. per second 
was attained, which corresponds approximately to the 
up-current energy below the thick cumulus clouds found 
behind typical depressions. The purely thermal cumulus 
clouds found during this flight, however, had neither the 
height nor the width which are associated with such condi­ 
tions. Directly over London, the flight became much more 
difficult owing to particularly bad visibility. Good visibility 
is absolutely necessary in cloud flights, in order that further 
groups of clouds and formations may be recognized. It 
became hardly possible to do this, so that the flight became 
really unsafe. Unfortunately, the barograph stopped after 
about two hours, so that further altitude curves could not be 
followed. In any case, the greatest height reached can 
be taken as four thousand three hundred feet. I reached 
this about two miles south of the Thames, over central 
London. It was a peculiar feeling, to be cruising high 
over this enormous city in my " Wien." Below me roared 
the traffic ; the factory sirens, the sirens from the steamers 
in the Thames, and the horns of the cars, could all be heard 
from my height, sometimes, loudly sometimes feebly. 
In the effort to reach as great a height as possible, on account 
of the uncertain possibility of landing, I shortly entered a 
cloud, but was not able to break through it. When I had 
regained my visibility, I was, in my estimation, somewhere 
towards the south-east of London, and I continued the

--- PAGE 445 ---
350 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
flight in the same direction, until I was compelled to land 
at Chatham towards the evening, owing to the ceasing of 
the cumulus activity. In the clear sky, I could still clearly 
trace out the thermal activity over the houses in the town 
itself, before I made a landing on a very nearly ideal field, 
which was filled with innumerable people immediately 
afterwards.
I am indebted to the incredible kindness and tremendous 
help of Admiral Snagge, for the fact that, with the assistance 
of his men, I was able to dismantle the machine and 
carry it away on a lorry, without using my own trailer.
The next morning, the machine was again assembled 
on a suitable site for a towed start. During the three 
and a half years' life of my " Wien " this is the only 
case in which the machine was transported without its own 
trailer, and yet it was not damaged in the slightest. This 
is certainly a proof that" the Navy can do anything." 
I was 
again towed up underneath the first best cumulus cloud by 
Flt.-Lt. Findlay, who is a master of the art of towing 
and can be trusted by anyone without fear. Unfortunately, 
I misinterpreted the warning which the cloud gave me by 
the ragged ends hanging down from below its base, which 
is normally a sign that the cloud is dispersing. 
I 
cast off, and from that moment continuously lost height, 
until I was, to my horror, at a height of not more 
than six hundred feet above the starting point ; whence, 
after having very nearly abandoned the idea of a further 
flight, I was able slowly to work up to one thousand feet, 
but only then to lose height again to about five hundred feet. 
Continuously occupied in looking for a landing place, I 
arrived over a cornfield, which reflected the heat of the sun. 
and over which a strong upward current was noticeable. 
I made use of this, immediately flying in climbing spirals. 
In this manner I was able to make contact with a large 
cumulus cloud, which was in course of formation in a 
dead calm between Wrotham and Otford. In spite of the 
up-currents being much more feeble than on the previous 
day, I was nevertheless able to reach three thousand feet, 
and, moreover, to my knowledge, for the first time in the 
history of soaring flight—to find my way back to Hanworth

--- PAGE 446 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS OVER LONDON 
351
by the aid of map, compass and course of the clouds. 
This is an undertaking which I had not believed possible. 
In order not to lose my chances in the bad visibility over 
London once again, and on the other hand to utilize to the 
full my altitude in the event of the flight failing, I worked 
my course towards Biggin Hill aerodrome, which I saw 
lying to the south of my course. 
I reached Croydon at a 
height of one thousand five hundred feet, after my barograph 
had again stopped by a failure of the clockwork. 
Over 
Croydon, I worked up to an altitude of three thousand feet 
in half an hour's strenuous activity. Then, thanks to the 
line which I found drawn between Croydon and Hanworth 
on the map borrowed from Flt.-Lt. Max Findlay, I arrived 
at the London Air Park at a height of one thousand five 
hundred feet.
Thermal soaring above 
all !—a 
new sport! 
The 
naturalists in the tropics had called this " sun soaring " 
in the case of birds. The Rhon competition, which followed 
this flight, brought into play the greatest efforts ; but even 
after I had landed in the London Air Park, I wrote : " What 
we in our conception had held as impossible has succeeded 
—flying overland in pure thermal currents. We are now 
at the beginning of a sport in which experience, knowledge 
and sense of feel count for everything/'

--- PAGE 447 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS IN ENGLAND
T
HERE are several ways of profiting from the perfor­ 
mances in every sphere of sport. One can value the 
purely sporting side highly or one can consider the 
actions of individuals as affecting everyone in general. 
My work in England will always bring me the most precious 
memories and I hope that I was able to give the young 
Soaring Flight movement in England some useful stimulation. 
The first meeting, which was held under the auspices of 
the British Gliding Association, was that on Itford Beacon. 
Messrs. Woolf and Lucas of the Piccadilly Circus Garage 
had arranged the tents and marquees and done everything 
possible to make things easy for the gliding pilots and the 
visitors. 
Since the first English meeting in 1922 no such 
gathering had been seen.
The first possible flying weather was awaited with sus­ 
pense. The site was ideal for winds from the north. But 
the slopes to the west and south were not steep, making 
conditions very difficult when the winds were from the 
south-west and south. Nevertheless I maintained that 
soaring was always possible with such a high performance 
machine as my " Wien," At the same time there was the 
young pilot, Magersuppe, from Kassel, who was flying 
for the Daily Express by which paper he had been 
brought over to England. He assembled his " Professor " 
and together with members of the English clubs who had 
arrived with their machines was soon in the middle of 
a brisk interchange of reminiscences and questions but 
there was insufficient time to settle all the points raised. 
On the third day of my stay in England I had an invitation 
from the Maidstone Club to deliver a lecture before their 
members and the interest of my audience showed me that 
still more such important work awaited me.
My first flight was made on Tuesday, June 3rd, in a light 
wind from the N.N.E. during the quietness of the evening.
352

--- PAGE 448 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS IN ENGLAND 
353
This flight showed me how suitable the terrain was. The 
following day I again soared in my " Wien " with the help 
of a west wind and reached a height of three hundred feet 
above the starting point. On June 5th we had to move our 
starting place to West Firle Beacon owing to the wind having 
gone round to the east. Those who witnessed my flights 
on this day were representatives of the aeronautical press 
and press photographers.
The British Gliding Association had before and during 
this time done good work. Their indefatigable Mr. Gordon 
England took me then to Portsmouth where a Gliding 
club was being formed. Once again I experienced the 
great interest which English people were beginning to show 
in motorless flight and was also received with the same 
enthusiasm and friendliness extended to me not only on 
my arrival, but also later on everywhere I visited.
Saturday was the first official flying day. The Mas­ 
ter of Sempill, who never seemed to tire, hurried down 
from London to help and organize everything. During 
the whole meeting he was at hand and gave us assurance that 
the arrangements were such that it would be a success. 
In the early morning Magersuppe started flying in a strong 
north wind and later in my " Wien " I wandered up and 
down the steep slopes of the South Downs over the storm- 
beaten spectators.
During this time the many zealous members of the 
London Gliding Club had assembled their " Priifling " and 
they allowed me to fly it after I came down. Directly 
after me came Captain Needham, who with a flight of an 
hour in the same machine gained the first " C" pilot's 
licence in England. It seemed that these flights broke 
the ice, for after this flight followed flight. A few minutes 
later Marcus Manton was in the air and he also succeeded 
in gaining his " C " certificate. 
So it went on, and while 
Buxton was flying for his " C," Captain Needham managed 
to keep a " Zogling " in the air for twenty minutes. This 
flight above all showed what an excellent site for up-currents
this was.
At 5 p.m. I took-off once more in the " Wien " in an 
endeavour to reach to up-currents beneath the clouds.
AA

--- PAGE 449 ---
354 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
The altitude of the slope at the point where I took off for 
this cloud flight was six hundred and twenty-four feet and 
I reached a height of over two thousand feet above the 
starting point. This showed that from even such slopes 
it was possible to reach the desired up-currents. In this 
way it was also possible to fly some four and a half miles 
straight out across the flat land and then again still to be 
able to glide back to the starting point. This particular 
wind direction made it impossible to carry-on with the 
clouds, as they were going out to sea.
Whit-Sunday brought with it conditions suitable for a 
training course for the numberless cheerful crowd of 
Gliding Club members. The wind was too strong for 
absolute beginners and therefore gliding on the " Zogling " 
was confined to those pilots who had already had experience 
on power-driven aircraft. In this way we gathered a great 
deal of experience and the position was such that there was 
little difference between the spirit found here and that which 
ruled at the Wasserkuppe. Thousands of spectators 
arrived and one machine started after another, some soaring 
on the steep slopes, others gliding lower on the hillside. 
On this day also Captain Fox-Barrett secured his " A " 
licence and the Master of Sempill his " B."
Whit-Monday arrived with only a light south-westerly 
wind. This was the opportunity for Lowe-Wylde to 
bring out the " Zogling " which he himself had designed 
and constructed and soon he was the most " flat-out " 
person present. At first it was quite impossible to soar, 
but later a little more wind sprang up which made it 
practicable to do so from the short south-west slope. This 
weak wind meant that only low altitudes could be reached, 
but this made it all the more interesting for the spectators, 
especially so as the flying was all explained to them by 
Mr. Gordon England. Representatives of the Royal Aero­ 
nautical Society were also present and helped to awaken 
interest in this new sport.
It was a pity that this wind was not stronger. Already 
I was waiting to do what certainly sooner or later someone 
will manage, namely to use the rising currents from the 
Downs which run parallel to the English coast. It is certain

--- PAGE 450 ---
91. 
UKKR KHOXFELD'S u AUSTRIA " AT HANWORTH PARK. 
THE LARGEST
GLIDER IN THE WORLD.
By courtesy of "Flight
Facing page 354

--- PAGE 451 ---
1)2. 
THE " ArsTiUA," VIEWED FROM BELOW. 
A MACHINE AVITH A
SPAN OF 90 FEET
IK). 
DRAWING OF KRONFELD'S " AUSTRIA " IN FLIGHT
Facing f>agc 35u

--- PAGE 452 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS IN ENGLAND 
355
that when the sun's rays are strong one should be able to 
reach the clouds and by this means make a long flight.
On Saturday, the i4th, the afternoon was again devoted 
to flying, both in the " Priifling " and the " Zoglings." 
The Master of Sempill and Mr. Gordon England hurried 
down from London in order to spend the week-end with 
the party on the Downs. Many " A " and " B " licences 
were the result of the instruction which Captain Needham 
gave throughout the whole day. My chief aim was, 
however, that several " C " licences should be gained, and 
it was with great pleasure that I heard the Master of Sempill 
mentioned as the first candidate. 
First of all I myself 
made a flight as for the " C " licence on the " Priifling " 
and the Master of Sempill following me put up an excellent 
show along the steep slopes of the Downs.
Thereafter in my notes of the flights I said :
" Looked at from the point of view of the instructor, this 
was the best ' C ' test. 
The pilot paid attention to all he 
had been told, flew in a disciplined manner, without 
making any unnecessary experiments or stunts/'
The Itford Hill site was certainly the most successful 
used during my time in England. Nothing was forgotten 
and the life was certainly the right one for soaring pilots. 
During these days a genuine beginner who had never even 
sat in an aeroplane before was taught to soar with the 
" Zogling," whilst Magersuppe soared above the Downs.
So it wTent on until late in the evening, the motor­ 
cars drove away and the Downs became stiller and 
stiller leaving us alone with our " Birds" which we 
finally took under cover into the tents, ready for further 
work in England.
Right early a great difference between the German and 
English gliding movement made itself very plain. In 
Germany gliding is a sport for the younger generation who 
through tenacity and zealousness endeavour to compensate 
themselves for the help and assistance which the well-to-do 
classes have at their beck and call. Also until lately 
gliding and power-driven flight were antagonistic witn 
very little in common. England has the leaders of her 
gliding movement to thank for the fact that this isolation

--- PAGE 453 ---
356 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
of the younger generation has been avoided. 
I remember 
that during those days we were visited by members of all 
classes of society, as well as from every branch of flying. 
For example, Lord Gage, who owned the land upon which 
we were flying made his first flights in a " Zogling." While 
Flight Lieutenant Stainforth the " fastest " man in the 
world will, I feel certain, not forget the slowest flight he has 
ever made in his life when he flew a " Zogling " on Itford 
Hill. All the most important English people in aviation 
were there, so many that I cannot remember them all. 
I trust, therefore, that those whom I have forgotten will 
forgive me when I merely mention that Sir Alan Cobham 
and Lady Bailey were on the Hill, whilst C. G. Grey 
smiled as he watched the efforts of the young generation 
on the site on which he had flown long before.
Sunday brought with it an E.N.E. wind and it was 
therefore by no means easy to soar close by our position. 
With a " Priifling " I obtained all kinds of experiences of 
the influence of vortices which from time to time were 
shed from behind the spurs projecting northwards from 
the slope. During the afternoon of this day I had the 
pleasure of demonstrating to the late Sir Sefton Brancker, 
the then Director of Civil Aviation. I then realized why, 
as I had noticed immediately on my introduction to him 
when landing in England, he had the respect of and was 
in sympathy with everyone in connexion with aviation.
Everyone will have noticed that my chief aim was to make 
long cross-country flights and that it was hard for me to 
confine myself to making flights up and down along a slope. 
Therefore, late in the afternoon when the public had started 
to go home, I asked Mr. Gordon England whether I could
f
o wandering. He is always enthusiastic to further the 
nowledge of soaring flight and therefore agreed to my doing 
so. I had intended to start about 4.30 p.m. but I had to 
make another flight instead of Magersuppe as he had landed 
his " Professor " in the valley and had yet to bring it back 
to the starting ground. It was therefore already 5.30 p.m. 
before I could get away and unfortunately the wind was 
dropping and the air much cooler. The first part of the 
flight was for gaining altitude over Firle Beacon, as before 
me lay the problem of getting across the two-and-a-half-

--- PAGE 454 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS IN ENGLAND 
357
mile-wide valley to Cliff Hill. Mr. Gordon England, who, 
with the late Jose Weiss was one of the pioneers of English 
gliding, stood on the starting ground and explained the 
flight to those who were following me. They could see 
how I gradually lost height as I glided across the valley 
until I was hidden from view by a spur of the Cliff Hill. 
After a few, what were to them and to me, alarming minutes, 
I began to climb and on top of a strong up-current caused 
by the best soaring slope of the whole district I quickly 
gained height and got over the next large valley by Lewes. 
North from Brighton, the Downs begin to bend to the south 
and it was very difficult to retain my height as the N.E. 
wind was blowing almost parallel to the slopes. Again I 
managed to get over a valley three miles wide to the next 
chain of hills but the sinking wind made it more and more 
difficult to carry on.
There was still another valley to be negotiated which, 
owing to the low altitude attained and the absolutely 
cloudless sky, required entirely different tactics to those 
employed in the Rhon district. The flight further on to 
Peters field presented no real difficulties. It was not until 
I reached there that I began to think about my further 
programme, but I had to do so then as it was already past 
8 p.m. and not only the visibility but also the strength of 
the up-currents was getting worse rapidly.
It would probably have been possible for me to have 
extended my flight by another ten to fifteen miles to 
Winchester, but to have beaten my World record flight so 
late in the evening would have been impossible.
As it was intended to move with the machines to Ports­ 
mouth the next day I resolved to make the flight to a fixed 
point and land, if possible, at Portsmouth. To attain this 
object a flight over ten miles of level terrain had to be made, 
there being only a few small hills and coppices to offer up- 
currents. The chief difficulty was, however, to determine 
the exact position of Portsmouth, for I had not had time 
to prepare the flight and therefore knew nothing beyond the 
fact that Portsmouth lay to the south. As the wind was 
very feeble I only cleared the last small hill near Petersfield 
by three hundred feet, with the help of its up-current. 
In view of the noiselessness of my flight and the advanced

--- PAGE 455 ---
358 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
O
o
CO2
5 
«
H 
H
rt ^
Q
M
fc
S3
CO 
fcO 
W
n 
o
PH
Q*
o 
tf 
^
PQ

--- PAGE 456 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS IN ENGLAND 
359

--- PAGE 457 ---
360 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
evening hour it struck me that I was very indiscreet in 
flying over a small wood swarming with courting couples. 
I imagine that it was not exactly considerate of me to call 
out at the top of my voice " Where's Portsmouth ? " A 
man called to in this manner first turned round three times 
trying to find where the voice came from and at last looked 
up into the evening sky where I circled. He then pointed 
out the direction. 
I confirmed this by observing the thick 
motor-car traffic on the road and directed my flight in the 
direction indicated, alongside the road and railway. 
Ports­ 
mouth was still out of sight as it lay down behind the 
Downs. I got over Portsdown Hill at a height of fifteen 
feet and just had sufficient time to glance at the town with 
its swampy outskirts lying beneath me. A descent there 
did not seem advisable so I circled back and landed on 
Portsdown Hill itself. In certain respects the flight 
resembled my sixty-mile one in the Teutoburger Forest, 
the height conditions were about the same but the valleys 
were larger. The right-angled turn over the ridge near 
Petersfield was necessary owing to my determination to 
land at a fixed point.
The assistance given me by everybody was remarkable. 
A group of Boy Scouts waged an untiring battle to keep 
back the crowd from 8.30 p.m. until my transport trailer 
arrived at 11.30 p.m. 
Captain Shaw, who was in command 
of an airship during the war, gave me every assistance and 
carried out all the necessary telephone calls. 
Councillor 
Webb, the Chairman of the Portsmouth Gliding Club, 
was also early on the scene and immediately gave me his 
aid and hospitality which continued throughout the whole 
of our stay in Portsmouth.
With this flight the days of Itford Hill were over. It 
was a time which had furnished indisputable proof that 
the English country-side was just as suitable for training 
as for soaring in high performance machines. It had also 
shown that the movement had taken root quicker than in 
the other countries ; and it remained, now, only to rouse 
the interest of the other parts of the country.
So far we had not got towed-gliding but were only 
acquainted with soaring along the slopes and therefore with

--- PAGE 458 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS IN ENGLAND 
361
the wind direction. To-day having recourse to towed 
starts and knowledge of thermal flying we can give exhibitions 
at any time over any kind of country. At that time the 
success of a meeting was at all times and above all dependent 
on the weather and for that reason we were not always quite 
so successful as at Itford Hill. At Portsmouth we flew 
from Beacon Hill but I myself was later able, on account 
of the strong south wind, to fly in my " Wien " from Ports- 
down Hill under first-class conditions and to reach the 
cumulus clouds as well as fly at times in the strong wind 
and rain. Once more I awakened interest in the greater 
long distance flights by a lantern lecture and explained 
both the theoretical and practical sides of training.
From Portsmouth we went to the Channel Club near 
Folkestone. The Royal Air Force officers received me as 
one of themselves, they flew with us, launched the " Zog- 
lings " from the slopes and organized everything. Happy 
is the land which has won such men as these for its aviation.
Once again the English country-side showed to advantage. 
We flew directly over Folkestone and Magersuppe made a 
flight of three hours ten minutes in his " Professor," landing 
on a recreation ground in the centre of the town. It was 
also at Folkestone that Gus Haller, the young American 
glider pilot, ran into us. He had gained his " C " certificate 
at the Wasserkuppe and had now come to learn and help 
at our meetings. There was probably no better method 
of introducing himself than the way he did, which was to 
roll up his sleeves and work like the " devil." From this 
day onwards he came with us through England and was not 
only a good friend but probably also saw and learnt much 
which helped him later in his victories in America. With 
heavy heart we parted from our R.A.F. friends, all of whom 
together with their leader Flight Lieutenant Stewart I shall 
remember with the kindest regards.
From there we went to Weymouth where on Eggardon 
Hill a site was found which offered an opportunity for real 
soaring in all directions of the wind. Again there arrived 
the coaches with thousands of people, again we flew, again 
the local club practised and again we exchanged experiences 
with the English pioneers. 
As everywhere, here also was

--- PAGE 459 ---
362 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
a man who while standing modestly in the background was 
chiefly responsible for all the success, i.e. Captain G. T. R. 
Hill. 
I listened with great respect to his reminiscences of 
how, at night by moonlight, he had made his first flights in 
order to avoid being ridiculed.
From thence we went to London. A lecture to the 
London Gliding Club called me there, but immediately 
afterwards I left for Ilkley in the north. How fortunate are 
the clubs laying in the mountainous parts of England! 
Beamsley Beacon was a place where I should like to have 
stayed longer than was permitted at that time. Long 
distance flights could have been made there, crossing 
from mountain to mountain, and if cloudy weather came 
then flights no less attractive from the sporting point of 
view than those of the Rhon would have been possible. 
However, we had no time to put all that to the test, for one 
cannot do justice to the public and at the same time carry 
out long distance flights. Our task was above all to arouse 
interest in gliding, and this was successfully carried out here 
as at all other places we had been to.
We now went on quickly to Scarborough in order to 
fly in the north-east. The interest with which we were 
expected there was really greater than ever. As before 
there was very little time at our disposal in which to inspect 
the country-side and nothing requires more care than the 
selection of a soaring site. 
On account of its accessibility 
we had to select Castle Hill as the only place in the imme­ 
diate neighbourhood which appeared to offer possibilities 
for soaring. This was probably one of the most romantic 
spots from which I had ever started. A cliff rose precipitately 
from the mainland and jutted out to sea. 
On the day we 
had to fly, the wind was really too strong. Magersuppe who 
was the first to start grazed a railing erected around the cliff, 
flew away over the Castle Hill and descended in the sea. 
I started badly myself. The machine, which would not 
climb, was caught by one of the launching crew, swung 
round and landed somewhat damaged at the starting point.
Much thought has been given to the elucidation of the 
two flights which were not so successful as the ones we had 
hitherto made. Those who are acquainted with the currents

--- PAGE 460 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS IN ENGLAND 
363
and their behaviour on steep slopes understand the 
conditions perfectly. Previously,, on the occasion of my 
Alpine expedition of 1928, we encountered, over a precipice, 
vortices which became more powerful as the wind increased 
in force. Only when the wind is very weak are the currents 
regular or when the sun's rays are strong enough, through 
thermal currents, to disperse the vortices. Wherever there 
is a vertical wall with a horizontal plateau above it a " weather 
vortex " forms itself on the windward side, which at 
Scarborough was the angle betweeen the cliff and sea, 
and its axis runs horizontal. Immediately against the 
perpendicular wall and directly below the top edge there is 
a strong down-current which in the case of less steep slopes 
is an up-current. The wind swirls up from below over 
the sharp edge and again a vortex is created, a lateral vortex, 
which again causes the wind to reverse. Only at a height 
of from thirty to sixty feet above the plateau is the up- 
current to be found. Owing to the limits of the ground it 
was necessary to start within the sphere of the lateral 
vortex but this is not constant at any one place, it forms, 
becomes larger, breaks up and draws away with the current. 
In strong winds which build up particularly strong vortices 
there come moments when a " start " is possible, just as a 
vortex has broken up and before the next one forms. 
These phenomena can be noticed from grass thrown up 
high. On this occasion the wind even blew at times 
against the main direction and under such conditions success­ 
ful starts are dependent upon fractions of seconds which it 
is very difficult to estimate exactly. Even a particularly 
powerful launch failed to overcome these adverse conditions. 
The short time at our disposal did not allow us quietly to 
study the conditions and I had to go on as there was yet 
another demonstration to give in England. Although, 
therefore, I was unable to fly properly I should like to 
express my thanks to the Scarborough Club for their work 
and to apologize to the launching crew for the fright I gave 
them when starting.
At high speed I had to drive to London through the night 
and rain with my " Wien " towed behind the Mercedes 
car so kindly placed at my disposal by the London Agency

--- PAGE 461 ---
364 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
of the Mercedes Co. The slight damage was repaired 
promptly by the de Havilland Aircraft Works and soon my 
" Wien " was ready for the last demonstration which was 
to be before His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, himself 
an aviator. Ivinghoe Beacon had been selected for this 
exhibition and under the guidance of the Chairman, Mr. 
Ashwell-Cooke, the London Gliding Club had assembled 
its " Zoglings " and " Priiflings." My " Wien " stood on 
the hill, which is certainly one of the best in the neighbour­ 
hood of London. The wind, however, caused us great 
anxiety for it was so weak that I was not sure whether 
soaring would be possible. The Prince, who had arrived 
in a light aeroplane, first of all devoted his attention to the 
training methods and I made a flight in a " Priifling " but 
the wind was too weak for soaring. 
I now put all my 
hopes in the " Wien." The up-currents were, however, 
so weak that immediately after the start I lost height and 
even in her I thought I should only be able to glide, but at 
last I succeeded in gaining a little height until I was soaring 
high over Ivinghoe Beacon. 
On calling out " I hope 
soaring flight will interest your Royal Highness," I received 
from below the reply, "Yes, indeed, immensely." I landed 
at the starting point where the Prince of Wales and Prince 
George, who had also flown over, inspected the " Wien " 
with great interest, both of them asking me many questions 
about soaring flight. A second start resulted in another 
short soaring flight with a landing on the field from which 
the two aeroplanes left with the Royal visitors. I had now 
to return quickly to Germany as the Rhon Competitions 
were about to commence, the next sporting work for me 
in England being the double cross-Channel flight for the 
big Daily Mail prize.
On the day before the competition, without troubling 
about the prize, Beardmore crossed the Channel on his 
" Professor," after being towed and with a strong following 
wind in beautiful weather. He did not commence the 
return flight. The crux of a competition lies in simulta­ 
neous performance of competitors. The winning of the 
Daily Mail prize was accomplished, in spite of strong head 
wind and bad weather, under official control and equal

--- PAGE 462 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS IN ENGLAND 
365
conditions for all competitors. Therein lay the sporting 
character of this competition. Beardmore's flight is an 
event by itself, although the personal effort of this pilot, 
no longer in his first youth, was certainly great.
After the Daily Mail flight I accepted an invitation to 
England. At Hanworth Park, where a large gliding meeting 
took place on June a8th, I was able to demonstrate my 
" Wien " and " Austria " before ten thousand spectators, 
in between the exemplary demonstrations of the English 
glider pilots. On this day I also managed a flight of an 
hour's duration over London Air Park in the up-currents 
under some small cumulus heat clouds. Flt.-Lt. Max 
Findlay came up in a " Martlet" to fetch me down in time 
to receive the Daily Mail cheque from the hands of His 
Grace, The Duke of Sutherland. In the succeeding days 
there were my two cross-country flights from London 
Air Park to Chatham and back. After a meeting at Black­ 
pool, organized by National Flying Services and where, 
also, I was able to show my " Wien " in towed flight, I 
returned to the Rhon.
For the Rhon Competition of 1931 particular attention 
had been directed towards encouraging talented newcomers, 
who were spurred to special efforts by difficult tasks. The 
practice competition provided prizes for the greatest total 
flying time, for the greatest aggregate altitude, and for 
distance flights. A minimum of twelve miles distance was 
stipulated. A new feature was provided by premiums for 
constructors, i.e., for young pilots who had built their own 
machines and had attained therewith a minimum altitude 
of three hundred feet.
In the main competition the requirements had been 
keyed up very high, having regard to the rapidity of progress. 
The competition again turned on the greatest distance flown, 
the minimum requirement being sixty miles. To the 
initiated it was obvious that the prize for the flight to the 
Oechsenberg near Vacha and back to the Wasserkuppe, 
could only be won with the aid of exceptionally favourable 
conditions. That again being particularly difficult during 
the competitions, because such conditions are usually 
reserved by the skilled pilots for their maximum distance

--- PAGE 463 ---
366 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
attempts. In the main competition also, the prizes were 
so allocated that the younger pilots who had not yet 
accomplished a long distance flight in a Rhon competition, 
were well encouraged and had chances of success. In 
recognition of the increasing importance of towed gliding, 
there was a special prize for a towing competition, in which 
the winner was the pilot achieving the greatest flying time 
after being towed to four thousand five hundred feet, 
i.e. one thousand six hundred and fifty feet above the 
Wasserkuppe, the landing being required, however, to 
be made at the altitude of the Wasserkuppe and within a 
fixed radius of the starting point.
During the first three days of the competition the weather 
was not particularly favourable, nevertheless this period 
and the flying I did sufficed for me to realize that my 
" Wien " was far from being in the condition necessary 
for so keen a struggle. The machine had been re-covered 
a few days previously with pure silk for maximum perfor­ 
mance, and had been doped with a material I had not 
previously tried. The covering proved very sensitive to 
humidity, in dry weather the wings were taut and smooth, 
but with the least humidity in the atmosphere the covering 
became so slack that it became wavy. This spoilt the 
performance to such an extent that in a trial flight I was 
hardly able to maintain the same altitude of an ordinary 
" Professor." After taking the advice of the meteorological 
station, which felt no hesitation in predicting nothing 
particularly favourable for the next few days, I decided 
to have the machine re-covered at Kassel, some three 
hours distance from the Wasserkuppe. On the day after 
I left there occurred the greatest thunderstorm flying day 
the Wasserkuppe has ever experienced.
It was a subject fit for a really great artist to record with 
his brush, for the impressions of that Saturday were 
incredibly beautiful in their grandeur. That afternoon, 
with all its display of sharply divided, bright colours, and 
the charged atmosphere which affected all present, will 
remain indelibly fixed in the memories of spectators and 
pilots alike.
It was one of the many competition days so often

--- PAGE 464 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS IN ENGLAND 
367
experienced by old Rhon-ites. The sun was broiling hot on 
the southern slope. The bright sunshine was reflected 
blindingly from the light coloured planes. The pilots and 
their assistants lay about lazily and sleepily in the shade. 
Far away in the south-west a black line slowly grew and 
rose. 
The men were still lying about as they had been 
for hours, but the leaders became suddenly wide awake 
watching acutely the course of the mounting black walh 
Then, nobody knew who began but in a moment all the 
machines were assembled close together on the Wasserkuppe, 
There they lay waiting, all eyes on the wind indicator. 
As soon as it veered they could start, as there was still a 
south wind. It was now certain that the atmospheric 
disturbance must come over the Kuppe and would not be 
deviated from its course. It was already lightning : the 
rain in the background veiling the mountains of the Rhon 
in the far distance.
At 5.13 p.m. the wind indicator veered, the velocity of 
the wind desultorily increased and decreased. Hemmer 
shot forward as first competitor. Almost immediately 
Groenhoff followed him and with incredible rapidity the 
next was also off. Within seven minutes all the twelve 
machines were in the air. Most of them were soon out 
of sight in the black clouds, and established contact with 
the " Front/' The rapidly approaching storm carried them 
out of sight with great speed.
At intervals notifications of landings arrived, Hirth and 
Groenhoff only being missing. Finally late in the evening, 
Hirth announced that he had landed at Friedeburg near 
Halle, a distance of one hundred and five miles, and last of 
all Groenhoff is reported as having come down at Meizendorf 
near Magdeburg after a flight of one hundred and forty-two 
miles. At 9.10 p.m. owing to approaching darkness 
Groenhoff, from an altitude of seven thousand five hundred 
feet, had seen far away below him a brilliantly lighted town, 
in the vicinity of which he had to make an emergency 
landing.
This day of storm flying probably demonstrated more 
than anything else the important strides made in gliding. 
On the occasion of my storm flight of 1929, only a single

--- PAGE 465 ---
368 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
machine had ventured to do battle with the elements, 
this year there had been twelve.
The fifth day of the competition was like a sigh of relief 
after the great event. The flights of the practice competition 
achieved times up to almost one hour. In the main competi­ 
tion there were no notable results. It was quite different, 
however, on the following days. 
I had returned to the 
Kuppe again with my " Wien " which had been re-covered 
with exemplar}7 promptitude at Fiesler's in Kassel and 
tested it on the slope. The machines competing in the 
main event had again returned. A new contest was expected 
in the next day or so. 
On July 28th a flight of nine hours* 
duration was achieved in the practice competition by Schmid 
in his machine " Wurzburger Generalanzeiger." Klinzer 
in his " Stuttgart " attained an altitude of one thousand 
two hundred and thirty feet. The main competition again 
provided a spectacle which the Rhon probably had not seen 
before. In the battle for the much contested Oechsenberg 
I started off first. 
I commenced the fight at the lowest 
possible altitude which permitted me nevertheless to 
attain the air current of the Rohn heights, but whilst I 
was still there gaining altitude I saw a whole squadron of 
machines coming from the Wasserkuppe. 
On this day, 
thickly covered with cumulus clouds, there were eighteen 
machines in the sky, and every youthful pilot was doing 
his utmost to emulate the most proficient. Even if they 
did not venture to make the flight at so low an altitude 
as I had, they nevertheless all went at it together as, under 
a particularly large cumulus cloud, they reached altitudes 
of nine hundred to one thousand five hundred feet above 
the starting point and followed Groenhoff, who was leading 
at one thousand nine hundred and fifty feet above starting 
point. Mayer in his " Aachen " was the only one who 
tried to keep on the course, and he landed at the foot 
of the Forest of Thuringen 32.7 miles distant from the 
Wasserkuppe. The others made for Oechsen but as 
they were getting away from the Wasserkuppe already I 
could see that the better pilots were Keeping to a 
higher altitude than the younger and inexperienced ones. 
Owing to this the majority were obliged to land during the

--- PAGE 466 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS IN ENGLAND 
369

--- PAGE 467 ---
370 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
.'Lr.
\
'
/
\
X

--- PAGE 468 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS IN ENGLAND 
371
outward flight, whilst the better pilots came down on the 
return journey. Hirth and Groenhoff having reached 
Oechsen returned over the same route as they had taken 
on the outward flight. In order to arrive at the Wasser- 
kuppe in this manner it would have been necessary, making 
allowance for the direction of the wind, to penetrate the 
downwind zone under the influence of the Kuppe. 
In my 
opinion this plan was not practicable. A return flight 
would have been possible to the neighbourhood of the 
Kuppe, which Groenhoff and Hirth proved, but to reach 
it appeared to me to be particularly difficult. 
I had, 
therefore, chosen another way, which, to be sure, at the 
commencement of the return flight promised considerably 
greater difficulties than the other route, but if these were 
successfully overcome then the flight would be assured. 
So it happened that I saw, as I was fighting late in the 
evening endeavouring to glide over this void, how the other 
machines, which like small butterflies in the bright light of 
day with their white wings standing out in bold relief, were 
dismantled by the assistants at the landing places in a circle 
of many miles and put under cover. 
Thus it was that 
on this day, the machines of Hirth, GroenhofF, and of the 
pilots Wallischeck, Hemmer, Stark, Bachem, Rohm and 
myself were lying in a radius of one and a half to twenty-six 
miles from the Wasserkuppe. Once again Hirth had 
landed nearest to the Wasserkuppe. He had landed within 
a distance of 1.54 miles of the starting point.
I, personally, had not given up the flight for the Oechsen- 
berg prize and glided twice more over the Oechsen, still 
trying to accomplish the return flight. This was not 
successful as the heat about the time I reached the most 
difficult position on the return flight had abated to such 
an extent that it was no longer possible to get over the 
valley. On my last trial I executed an almost purely thermal 
flight, which for six hours fifteen minutes necessitated the 
most arduous detail work, inseparable from this kind of 
flying. The longest flying time actually over the Kuppe 
was attained by Hirth with twenty-four minutes on this 
day. For this reason the long distance flight to a point 
could not be competed for.
BB*

--- PAGE 469 ---
372 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
During this competition cloud gliding was practised 
quite generally and as a matter of course, and even the 
pilots in the practice competition frequently reached great 
altitudes above the Kuppe. On the tenth day of the compe­ 
tition Teichman in the " Offermann," a machine of the 
" Mayer Ma " type, reached a height of one thousand six 
hundred and twenty feet above starting level. This 
altitude, however, was exceeded owing to the particularly 
favourable conditions prevailing on the twelfth day of the 
competition. Teichmann himself reached two thousand 
and forty feet, Bihlmaier in a standard " Professor" 
two thousand five hundred and fifty feet above the start, 
and Hakenjos in a " Professor " even as high as two thousand 
five hundred and sixty-five feet, all of these being perfor­ 
mances, which a few years ago could not have been achieved 
even with the very best of machines and by the most 
experienced pilots. The experiment undertaken by Hem- 
mer, Mayer, Bachem and a number of others, myself 
among them, of utilizing a purely thermal storm was also 
interesting. What had been expected in advance took 
place on this flight. Real thermal storms do not develop 
typical " fronts." Frequently they hardly advance at all, 
but divide and follow small mountain valleys, when they 
sometimes even turn about. I myself have allowed the 
storm to pass over me without being able to find any up- 
currents worth anything. 
Such currents certainly exist 
but only at considerably higher levels and might in all 
probability be accompanied by particularly heavy hail. In 
any event the exploitation of these storms has not been a 
success. 
All flights on that day were unimportant.
An interesting innovation in the Rhon competition was 
the towing flight contest. In order to judge the perfor­ 
mances correctly it was specified that the contest had to 
be carried out in such a manner as to bring all the machines 
to the same altitude simultaneously. As only one towing 
machine was available, which at the time of the best heat 
commenced towing, and as the order of starting was 
determined by casting lots, luck played a very important 
part in this contest. 
I feel I am all the more bound to 
raise this point as I received the first prize in this contest.

--- PAGE 470 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS IN ENGLAND 
373
The best times flown after casting off were those of Groenhoff 
and Hirth with one hour forty-two minutes and one hour 
twenty-seven minutes respectively, whilst I, who started 
later, followed with one hour ten minutes. 
I landed, 
in accordance with the rules, as the only one above 
the prescribed height of eight hundred and in a radius 
of one kilometre. It would be quite conceivable that even 
if only a few engined machines were available, such a 
contest could be carried out in such a manner as to give 
a scale on which performances could be judged correctly. 
It would only be necessary to tow the machines starting 
first to a higher altitude corresponding to their sinking 
speed, so that all the planes at a predetermined time were 
at a certain height, from which time onward the flying 
time only would be appraised. 
It will be absolutely 
impossible, on account of the varying heat at different 
hours of the day, to obtain an equal scale for all the 
machines.
Probably, the most interesting performances of the contest 
were the distance flights utilizing the heat. The flights 
over the large towns in the spring of last year, my first 
distance flights over level terrain in London, my last two 
flights to Oechsen and the towed flight contest had all, more 
or less, been thermal flights. The performances put up 
on August 2nd, among which the high altitudes, already 
mentioned, attained by the practice pilots and above all 
by Hakenjos are also included, belong likewise to this newest 
field of gliding flight. On August 2nd, we had weather 
conditions very rare in the Rhon district. Particularly hot 
weather and exceedingly strong east winds prevailed. 
Groenhoff was the first to disappear after he had reached 
a high altitude. Hirth started later and quite a considerable 
time elapsed before he was successful in working his way 
up high in a thermal current. At approximately seven 
hundred feet he was able to escape from the Wasserkuppe 
mountains and he circled up in spirals to two thousand feet. 
Thermal gliding is only possible by continued circling in 
an up-current and it is therefore obvious that during this 
time, one drifts in the direction of the wind. When Hirth 
had reached this high altitude he found himself about

--- PAGE 471 ---
374 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
six miles west of the Wasserkuppe. He now felt his way 
from up-current to up-current, aided by the up-current 
" indicators " which are provided for glider pilots by 
soaring birds and butterflies that have been blown along. 
When he found himself south of Fulda he met Groenhoff 
in his " Fafnir " who followed the same tactics under 
identical conditions. The machines now flew in company 
which were favourable to both. Birds also circle in large 
numbers in thermal up-currents of this kind and when 
one of them begins to ascend out of the large field of 
influence they all fly to the place where the up-current is, 
and in a like manner those points are avoided where, as 
compared with the others, a bird falls. 
Groenhoff, Hirth 
and I had carried out these tactics during the thermal 
soaring after being towed off at the Wasserkuppe and now 
Hirth and Groenhoff were making use of them in their 
distance flight. The machines flew in the direction of 
Frankfurt at a height of three thousand to three thousand 
five hundred feet, sometimes one and then the other being 
the higher. Later on during the flight the machines lost 
sight of each other and finally Groenhoff landed near 
Usingen, a distance of 64.2 miles from the Wasserkuppe. 
Hirth who also had lost considerable altitude, was able, 
however, to work up to a height again : he had adopted 
the tactics of circling in small thermal currents and after 
a fight during which he had sunk down to a few hundred 
feet above the ground had again worked up high, so that 
between Oberlahnstein and Koblenz he reached the Rhein 
at an altitude of three thousand feet. He further succeeded 
in crossing the Mosel but with the approaching evening 
the heat abated. Hirth tried to reach the cliffs of the Eifel 
along which he wished to soar by means of the up-current 
from them. He landed near Brohl after covering a distance 
of one hundred and nineteen miles. This was by far the 
greatest distance which had ever been flown from the 
Wasserkuppe in this direction.
In this magnificent contest also I had been unable to 
participate. In the opinion of the doctor I ought really 
to have been in bed. To say the least he did not allow me 
to eat anything and wrote a diet card for me which even a

--- PAGE 472 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS IN ENGLAND 
375
baby would have taken as an insult. When the last day 
of the competition arrived I had for the five preceding days 
existed on a few plates of soup. The day also did not look 
particularly promising. Up to the time I started, the 
longest flight for the day had been one of nine minutes. 
It was not possible for any machine to stay up over the 
slope of the mountain. There was practically no wind. 
Only a few gusts of heat now and then presented the oppor­ 
tunity of gaining altitude, leaving one at the next moment 
in the lurch again. 
Immediately I started I fell away so 
much under starting height and even got lower than the 
height of the Eube. After I had battled there for an hour 
I succeeded in getting into a thermal current in which, 
continually circling, I worked up. Continually gaining 
more and more height I finally said good-bye to the Kuppe 
at one thousand and fifty feet above start and saw below 
me other machines of the main competition endeavouring 
to follow me. 
All these efforts, however, had to be aban­ 
doned after a short flight of a few minutes. 
I had arrived 
in a region, however, in which I remained during the whole 
of the flight and which was at a height of between three 
thousand six hundred to four thousand eight hundred feet. 
Further my course lay towards the west. 
I drew away 
towards Fulda, but lost altitude in down-draughts. I then 
again got in an imperceptible up-current, cautiously 
worked in and gained height again. It was a fight with an 
invisible opponent which made it the more fascinating. 
The up-currents, whose connexion with the ground for 
the most part cannot be perceived, are supposed to be 
somewhere about. The machine was flowrn in one direction, 
lost altitude and kept the attention constantly to a high 
pitch in order to be able to feel the slightest puff of up-wind. 
Upon which one immediately turns so as to avoid flying 
through it, commences to circle and the greatest care is 
taken to work one's way cautiously into the region of the 
strongest influence of the current. In this manner I went 
in a northerly direction past Marburg until I saw lying a 
long way beneath me the Rothaar mountains. However, 
the mountains no longer occupied my attention. Indeed, 
in the prevailing calm they would not have assisted me.

--- PAGE 473 ---
376 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
The only thing of importance was to locate the thermal 
currents again, make use of these to attain the highest 
altitude one could in them, or until they broke up in order to 
ascend again at another point. Again I had been on the 
way for over six hours and again the heat suddenly abated 
in the evening, as we had already noticed in all our flights 
up to the present. I had as a matter of fact made Miinster 
my goal, where I had begun my work of gliding over level 
terrain in the spring of this year. I was, however, compelled 
to descend before reaching there. 
I had flown from the 
Wasserkuppe to Westphalia. 
I landed near Freienohl in 
the neighbourhood of Arnsberg after covering a distance 
of ninety-six miles.
All this is merely preliminary to the great thermal 
flights which the next few years will bring.
Allusion must be made to a comrade, Otto Fuchs, who 
wras unable to fly with us although we had all looked forward 
to his appearance and success. 
Owing to an accident 
such as is associated with aviation he injured himself so 
badly on the first day of the competition that he could not 
take part in the contest We, therefore, have missing from 
the list of winners, the name of one who otherwise would 
be included in it.
With most amazing rapidity gliding has made great 
progress all over the world. England arranged a repetition 
of the Inter-Club Competitions which had become so 
popular the preceding year. The first competition of this 
kind had already taken place at Easter. During these days 
the pioneer work of Lowe-Wylde in towing by motor-car 
had become quite clear even to those of slight discernment. 
The noted gliding pilots Captain Stratton, Turner, and 
Captain Needham were on the list of winners with Mr. 
Mole and Mr. Reffel. On August 2nd Mole improved the 
English duration record in a " Professor " up to six hours 
ten minutes. In Honolulu, Lieutenant T. C. Grain, an 
officer of the United States Army, flew sixteen hours 
thirty-eight minutes thus breaking the German duration 
record. All over the world small groups are forming, 
small contests are taking place and very often good 
performances are being achieved.

--- PAGE 474 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS IN ENGLAND 
377
Partly overlapping the Rhon competition, the American 
Competition had once again taken place at Elmira, New York.
At the 1931 Competition held from August 2nd to the 
16th little flying could be done compared with the preceding 
year, as a consequence of the absence of sufficient wind. 
More than half of the participating machines were of the 
Franklin Utility type, which, owing to their less efficient 
gliding angle as light wind machines, were badly handi­ 
capped as compared with the high performance machines. 
They have, however, distinguished themselves in schools 
devoted to towing by motor-cars. A new machine there 
is the " Haller Hawk," constructed by the Haller Hirth 
Sailplane Corp. of Pittsburg, two of which were flown 
in the competition.
During the competition Gus Haller became ill an 
permitted his machine, the well known " Schloss Mainberg " 
to be flown by Schempp, who succeeded in achieving 
with it not only the distance flight of 14*4 miles but 
also the highest altitude of two thousand eight hundred 
and fifty feet and the longest total flying time of eighteen 
hours forty-two minutes. Hawley Bowlus was second in 
the distance flight with twelve miles, whilst Hastings in 
addition to the first prize for a duration flight of seven 
hours thirty minutes also won the second prize for an 
altitude of one thousand eight hundred feet and the third 
prize for distance. 
Stickler was second with seven hours 
twenty-eight minutes for duration and Barton won the 
first for best landing at fixed destination. The desire of 
all the pilots to try for the distance gliding is worthy of note. 
A lady, Mrs. Holderman, also participated in the competition 
and she succeeded in putting up the duration record for 
women of forty-nine minutes. It is further worth while 
noting the fact that the first four for the prize for the best 
landing at fixed destination were pilots who had just 
passed their " C " test during the competition. Unfortu­ 
nately there were also three accidents to be noted, one of 
which is to be attributed to the inferior construction of the 
machine. The parties involved were obliged to withdraw 
from the competition on account of the injuries they had 
sustained,

--- PAGE 475 ---
378 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
From September loth to 24th an international competition 
was held in France, which was accompanied by exceedingly 
unfavourable wind conditions. 
I took part in this as the 
only foreigner, but the conditions as described above 
offered no opportunity for particularly good performances. 
The wind permitted me only on two occasions to fly for 
any length of time and then it was a wearisome battle with 
the thick fog, which for minutes at a stretch hid everything, 
approaching from over the sea. On this flight I remained in 
the air four hours forty-two minutes. Unfortunately 
longer distance flights were not possible. The up-currents 
on the slopes of the Vauville terrain were particularly 
strong and on my first flight I was able, in a current from 
the slope, to climb to an altitude of one thousand seven 
hundred and ten feet.
It was of great interest to me to notice that during the 
whole of the competition, the many flights of the school 
machines, even the very short ones, were almost always 
made with the assistance of the motor winch. Another 
proof of the advantages of this practical method.
With the exception of Abrial who flew a " Kassel 25," the 
French pilots, among them Fauvel, Barbot, Appert and 
Bouvier, had fast and heavy machines and, owing to the 
head wind, were only able to make short gliding flights 
down to the beach. Abrial on one occasion made a flight 
of fifteen minutes duration.
Particularly hearty co-operation linked us with the 
University Flying Club under the direction of Jean Rippert 
who came off victorious as winner of the training competition. 
" Pere " Lagasse was director and organizer of this competi­ 
tion and at the conclusion was most heartily praised by 
everyone.
Immediately after the French competition the session 
of the International Commission for Gliding Flight began 
at London. In connexion herewith a competition took 
place on October 3rd and 4th at Balsdean which again in 
consequence of unfavourable wind conditions did not 
permit good performances being made. The visitors to 
the session were present at this competition.
These days certainly contributed to bring the glider

--- PAGE 476 ---
MY SOARING FLIGHTS IN ENGLAND 379
pilots of the world nearer to each other. It was resolved 
to hold an international competition annually in one of the 
adjacent countries and institute investigations into gliding 
in the tropics.
The decision that in the opinion of the commission towed 
flight is not suitable for obtaining the same flying experience 
as in the case of flying over a slope unfortunately shows that 
the experience of those who have already considerably 
practised this kind of flying has not received sufficient 
consideration.
It would lead too far to go exhaustively into the details 
of the gliding movement, as it is being taken up very exten­ 
sively now throughout the world. A lively feeling of 
reciprocity between individual countries is now setting in. 
Not only are the European countries devoting themselves 
to the new style of flying, but engineless flight is also 
advancing into the most distant parts of the world.
Towed flight, particularly towing by automobile, has 
been rapidly adopted by America, and in England its best 
partisan is to be found in the person of the indefatigable 
Lowe-Wylde. Repercussions of the movement emanating 
from America and England are now being felt in Germany. 
Every year we receive with pleasure the representatives of 
the whole world both in the big competitions and in the 
gliding schools of Germany. As a result of the work put 
into gliding flight all over the world, it may be that the 
performances in gliding during the coming year will be 
scattered widely over the earth.
