d 
myself a nest.
In order to save the machine I saw that I would have 
to go back some five miles to the last good landing place 
I had noticed. 
Heartbroken, I turned away from the 
sixty-mile limit I had so nearly reached, but just as I 
put the machine into the turn I saw dimly before and 
above me, far away from the slope, a tiny tattered rag of 
mist of the type that crowns a weak warm air current. 
Here was a forlorn hope. If I could gain about one hundred 
and sixty feet, I should be able provided that I turned at 
once to dodge along under the cumuli now travelling 
swiftly over the ridge. The bronze Teuton warrior, past 
whom I had to return, raised his sword dangerously 
towards the heavens, and I was so low down that I nearly 
ran down (or rather flew down) good old Hermann.
The town of Detmold came into my field of vision 
on the left of my route, and the vital question was : would 
the clouds be strong enough to overcome the downdraughts

--- PAGE 191 ---
144 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
of the slope ? 
They were, and so I pushed on for a long 
time in the boundary layer between the up and down winds. 
When one or the other happened to catch me, I was 
violently tossed higher or lower, so that I had little time to 
think of choosing a landing place. A last turn, which 
brought me round in the direction of the valley, enabled me 
to gain another short stretch with the help of wind and 
gliding angle, and I landed with the wind behind me in 
a cloud of dust on a ploughed field. The first sixty-mile 
soaring flight was at an end.
Hallo ! 
Was there a fair in the neighbourhood ? 
Many 
people who had seen me flying had no idea that this was 
the first sixty-mile motorless flight, that it had succeeded, 
that the greatest of the soaring flight prizes was won. 
Only their enthusiasm had brought them along ; 
the 
impression created by the silent passage of the giant bird 
had been so irresistible that workmen left their workshops 
in their blue overalls, and, annexing the first motor car or 
cycle, had followed the airplane. And now they arrived one 
after the other. What rejoicings and congratulations were 
showered on me from all sides !
I was so dead tired that I could hardly take in the general 
rejoicing. The whole evening I was dragged from one 
festivity to another ; in the midst of a long congratulatory 
speech somewhere or other I must have gone off to sleep. 
I here and now take the opportunity to beg the kind friends 
who were present to forgive me.
One among the many telegrams bringing me greeting and 
good wishes that day I shall remember as long as I live.
Here it is for you :
That Teuton land, which once o'ercame me, 
Sent thee up to victory fair : 
I gladly from my tomb acclaim thee 
Victor o'er the powers of air.
QUINTILIUS VARUS 
(Erstwhile Roman Commander).
Spiritualists would maintain that old Varus himself, clad 
in clinking harness, took this message to the post. Personally 
I believe that it was some jolly wag in more modern garment.

--- PAGE 192 ---
SOME FLIGHTS OF MY OWN 
145
IV
SOARING IN A SNOWSTORM
We are used to all sort of things up here on the Wasser- 
kuppe in the Rhon, but snow and icy cold in May cannot 
be called comfortable. And just this was the moment 
chosen for a visit to us by an American pilot who wished 
to study European flying on the spot ; in two hours and 
thirty-five minutes he had precisely that amount of time 
to spare he desired to gain an insight into the aims, 
objects and importance of soaring, to see the Research 
Institute, the School, and, if possible, see a flight.
Should we excuse ourselves on the ground of bad 
weather ? Herr Stamer, the chief instructor of the Flying 
School, looked at me questioningly. " Are you inclined to 
fly ? " said his glance, but I felt really inclined to make an 
attempt. We had there twenty new pupils in the beginners' 
course, who had not yet seen soaring.
They brought the " Prlifting " out to the western 
slope. The American looked on suspiciously. Ahead of 
us a snowstorm scudded along over the steep slopes, while 
far below us we could still see the village of Poppenhausen. 
The snow began to drive horizontally. " Nowhere in 
Germany would an engine-driven plane be allowed to start 
in such weather/' said an air policeman who was on duty. 
The American grew very quiet.
The launching rope was hooked on ; twelve men pulled 
on it, while two held the plane from behind. " Let go," I 
shouted. My " Priifling " shot violently forward and at once 
began to rise. "A damned strong wind to-day," thought I. 
Excuse the expression, but we really do think like that at 
such moments. I moved forward very slowly, with the 
snow whipping me in the face. It was stubborn work ! 
Great gusts and eddies of wind met me from rock and forest, 
buffeting me from in front and below a hard battle. 
The machine danced in every direction, the lever in my 
right hand jumped from one corner to the other. But the 
plane climbed. 
I rose three hundred feet above my starting 
point and found the wind up there still stronger. I had to

--- PAGE 193 ---
146 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
press the " Priifling " in order to make any headway at all. 
Now I could make out below me the sharp edge of the 
slope. Time to use the rudder ! 
My left foot pushed 
the pedal forward, the world flew down around me ; the 
whistle of the wind in the struts changed its tone as I turned 
to the left slowly and began to ascend above the edge of the 
slope which flung the wind up to me. I was now seventy 
feet above my starting point, and the wind was steadier 
except when (often enough) I got into "a lift." Then 
I was shot straight up suddenly thirty, or even sixty feet.
The flurry of the snow became thicker ; through it I 
could just distinguish the steep ridge of the Pferdskopf. 
I turned about ; for one moment I stood again head on to 
the storm. How the snow crystals stung my eyes ! 
I took 
the plane out of the turn and noticed that the slope beneath 
me was hardly visible through the driving snow. 
That 
meant that I had risen farther ; I was in the clouds. I had 
to push down a bit in order to be able to see the ground 
beneath me. Hallo ! Flyers' Monument, launching crew, 
starting place small as toys, far below! 
So turn again !
The wind had changed and was blowing from the 
Pferdskopf. My eyes burned and smarted ; 
should I 
put on glasses ? 
What was the use ? 
The snow would 
only settle on them. 
And again I flew towards the 
Pferdskopf, slowly, infinitely, slowly for hours. . . . Ten 
minutes, said the watch. Turn, slabs of fog, squalls, turn. 
In long white strips the snowflakes pelted horizontally out 
of the endless grey ; I saw long white strips, nothing else. 
And I felt them like sharp pointed arrows. 
The cold 
mounted slowly from my feet upwards. A turn, another 
. . . twenty minutes. Will it never stop snowing ? 
Grey, 
nothing but grey ! 
It was only possible occasionally to 
distinguish very prominent landmarks on the earth below, 
but I began to experience an amazing indifference. 
I had 
a fervent longing to shut my eyes and dream. I pulled 
myself together, grasped the lever firmly, and steered 
from turn to turn, fighting the cold, the storm, the fog 
and the snow.
And then I was forced to recognize that to-day nature would 
not yield. Thicker and thicker the fog rose up from below,

--- PAGE 194 ---
SOME FLIGHTS OF MY OWN 
147
mingling with the snow as it drew closer and closer. It was 
high time to go down. I descended in spirals ; the slope 
whirled up to meet me. Once more I had to pull myself 
together for the landing. Up the slope with the wind 
behind ; look out! rocks to the right! rudder! now push! 
Thirty miles an hour was the wind speed, my flying speed 
about forty-five that meant a landing of at least seventy 
miles an hour.
Look out! a stone in the way ! I move my stick slightly 
and clear it! Rrrrschsch the skid scrapes along the ground; 
the swing drags me forward, but my safety belt holds me 
firmly ; then peace ! 
I have done it!
And then, after I had rubbed the snow and ice from my 
eyelashes, I looked at the watch, which registered a fifty 
minutes flight. The starting crew came hurrying up ; 
the flight leader and the American congratulated me. 
Why ? 
The only things I was conscious of at that moment 
were stiffness, smarting eyes and a feeling of something 
splendid, indescribable. . . . 
Before they ordered me off 
into the warm house, I asked our American,who, like every- 
one else, was in a somewhat frozen condition, what im- 
pression the whole business had made upon him.
" Greenly Island," said he dryly.
Later I learnt that he had sat all the time on a stone, 
in the storm, watching the machine whenever it was in 
sight, and dumb with astonishment at the miracle of soaring. 
And down below in Poppenhausen he ordered from our 
flying machine constructor two soaring planes, express. 
" My boat sails in three weeks, and I must take them 
across with me."

--- PAGE 195 ---
THE GLIDING AND SOARING SCHOOL
W
HAT a bustle ! 
What a hullabaloo ! 
A new batch of young folk has arrived at the 
school and throngs round the instructors, asking a 
thousand questions, each of which demands an immediate 
answer.
" How do you land ? "
" Do you push the stick much to one side when you make a 
turn ? 
Do you pull it hard when you want to soar ? 
What 
must I do if the machine heels over ? 
What do I do when 
I start ? 
How do I hold . . . ? 
What . . . ? 
Why . . . ? "
Every one has a difficult problem, but we instructors 
pay no heed to them, for we know that everything comes 
with practice. " Flying is all a matter of feeling and habit/' 
we tell them, " don't try to think too much ; only the swift, 
subconscious reaction which is more or less inborn in all 
of us will help you at first. Later, when you can do the 
big things, you may use your brains. And now, just be 
quiet. What you have to do first of all is to settle yourself 
calmly in the machine and follow your teacher's instructions." 
We then treat them to the few words that we say at the 
beginning of every course. We do not tell them more 
than the bare essentials because we do not want them to be 
thinking when they should be learning to feel. " Settle 
yourself comfortably on your seat," we say, " and put your 
feet on the rudder-bar. Take the control lever in your 
right hand quite lightly don't clutch at it. Everything 
must feel quite comfortable and unconstrained. 
Sit as 
you would in an armchair. The stick you can manipulate 
so easily is the flyer's magic wand ; think of it as a force 
that propels the machine in any direction. It is your job 
to make it guide your plane wherever you want it to go. 
Look at the horizon and take some point that you can 
easily keep in sight. Look at it steadily and remember 
that as you see it now, so you must see it when you are in
148

--- PAGE 196 ---
THE GLIDING AND SOARING SCHOOL 149
the air. If the machine rears up, push the stick forward 
a bit to bring it to the level again ; if its right wing dips, 
push the stick to the left ; if the nose dips, pull the stick 
towards you. All your movements must be quiet and 
efficient. As regards your lateral steering, better not worry 
about it at present, but if your machine goes into a turn, 
which you can easily tell by noting the position of your 
fixed point, then press the rudder-bar on the other side ; 
that is to say, if you find yourself turning left, push the 
right foot forward and vice versa.
" But you must do everything smoothly and without any 
fuss, and you'll find this much easier than you think. 
Your instincts will help you far more than they do when 
you're steering a car. Now come along and have a shot 
at it."
One of them takes his seat in the pupil's machine, which 
we have brought to a perfectly level spot. The wind for 
these first efforts must be only a gentle breeze, with a 
velocity not exceeding twenty feet a second. On either side 
of the launching rope are some three or four men, waiting 
to start.
Before the novice takes off, I show him the neutral position 
of the control lever (" stick "). " Now press just the least 
little bit," I tell him, " no, that's too much. Ah, that's 
right."
It is usual for the pupil to give the words of command at 
his first lesson. " Pull out " he cried, usually with some 
hesitation. The crew walk about eight steps. " Run," 
is the next instruction, but some pupils can get no further 
than that, and often I have to interpose with a hasty " let 
go," to prevent the rope breaking.
To be a good teacher of soaring you must be able to 
divine the feelings and secret reactions of every pupil from 
the way his steering affects the planes. All teachers must 
practise the graphology of the air from the moment they give 
their first lesson.
This affords plenty of opportunity for observation. 
One pupil does simply nothing at all, does not push the 
lever the least bit, but the machine flies perfectly. Five or 
six seconds his first flight lasts.

--- PAGE 197 ---
150 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
" How did you feel ? " I ask afterwards, and the man who 
two minutes before had been crouching in the machine, 
hardly venturing to touch the controls, replies : " I started 
nicely ; then came a gust from the right; I moved the rudder, 
noticed that I pushed it too far, adjusted it, pulled the stick 
a bit and steered sideways. 
Then I got ready to land/' 
It is extremely difficult to convince him that he has done 
none of these things, though he may have imagined himself 
doing them.
" Have you ever dreamed that you are being pursued ? " 
I ask him. " You want to run, but you can't. You believe 
that you are exerting all your powers, but in reality you are 
doing nothing at all. That's what you and most beginners 
are like the first time you're in the machine."
The next pupil pushes the stick a bit too hard when he 
starts, and the machine comes down with a bump after a 
flight of less than twenty feet. " First I saw everything 
blue around me," says the man, " then it all changed to 
green, and finally the machine crashed." He at least is 
honest.
The most difficult pupil is the one that starts by doing 
everything wrong. The machine rears, but instead of 
pushing the stick forward, he pulls it. The machine 
continues to rear ; he pulls it further until it is almost 
standing on its tail. It hangs in the air for a fraction of a 
second, and then drops earthward like a ripe plum. No 
great damage is done as the fall is merely a matter of some 
twelve feet or so, because we always start our beginners on 
level ground, so that the worst that may happen is a broken 
wire or two, while man and machine are certain to escape 
serious injury.
" What did I do wrong ? " asks the unlucky fellow. " I 
meant to push the stick over." He may be one of those 
persons who cannot grasp the simple action of the control 
lever, and to such a one you must try to explain matters in 
some other way. " Imagine that you are in a kayak or some 
kind of light boat," you tell him. 
" A high wave surges 
up before you ; what do you do to balance your boat ? " 
" I bend forward." " And on the same principle you 
bend sideways if the boat lists. If you can't learn it any

--- PAGE 198 ---
NORMAL. FLI&HT!
HOW TO STEER
-..,
A
FIELD OF VISION
STAY AS I 
YOU ABE i
37.
THE PLANE TIPS TO THE RI&HT i
HOW TO STEER
FIELD OF VISION 
LEVER TO THE LEFT!
38.
Facing page 150

--- PAGE 199 ---
THE PLANE TIPS TO THE LEFT!
1 HOW TO STEER
FIELD OF VISION
LEVE8 
TO THE
39.
B.KBONFELD
HE TURNS TO THE LEFT!
HOW TO STEER
J_
FIELD OF VISION 
RIGHT FOOT FORWABD1
to.
Facins, page 151

--- PAGE 200 ---
THE GLIDING AND SOARING SCHOOL 151
other way, try what you can do by bending your body in 
the machine, and while you do so, accompany the move- 
ment with the hand that holds the lever. It's a trick that 
will help you at first, but you have to get out of it later, of 
course. But in most cases it works well."
Most beginners do not realize what they do with the 
stick. The first essential is to get them used to the method 
of starting, and you can draw your own conclusions from 
the way in which a man seats himself in the machine. One 
perches lightly and gracefully, another assumes a cramped 
attitude ; many are so excited that they forget to strap 
themselves in, fidget restlessly or remember some question 
that they want to ask just as the machine takes the air. 
The trembling of a pupil's toes often tells tales of nervous- 
ness that he is striving to conceal.
The instructor must endeavour to adapt himself to the 
idiosyncrasies of all pupils. His practised eye will tell him 
how many of them will behave in the air before they enter 
the machine, and it is a mistake to think that only the good 
sportsman will fly well. Flying is far too much a matter of 
feeling.
The average man who reacts well (every normal pupil in 
fact) will over-steer at first, because it is man's nature to 
react quickly to great and sudden impressions. In flying 
every movement of the machine will seem twice as great 
as it really is because of the pupil's excited state. 
Initial 
nervousness will cause him to exaggerate his manipulation 
of the stick, and consequently both machine and pilot are 
in a state of continual unrest ; they tip over from one wing 
to the other and dance up and down until the pilot is com- 
pletely confused.
" I cannot get the machine steady ; there are so many 
gusts which fling it about." You hear that again and again, 
even when hardly a breath of wind disturbs the air. " Per- 
sonal gusts " is the term we use to describe the state of 
mind of the nervous flyer whose incessant jerky movements 
lead him to think that he is flying in gusty air. " You must 
take it easy," I tell him. " Don't grasp the control lever 
so fiercely ; no force is needed ; you can steer with two 
fingers. Let the machine fly by itself at first, and you will

--- PAGE 201 ---
152 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
see how steady it is. It can always keep itself rightly balanced 
without any interference from you."
Then the pupil flies again. The teacher gathers the 
others around him, and shows them the good and the bad 
examples.
" Look how steady the machine is," you say when you 
watch the best of them. " That fellow is taking it easily, 
and you must all try to imitate him."
One after the other takes his turn in the machine ; at 
the fifth or sixth effort they begin to make progress.
This is a typical description of the first day's work. In 
the evening our machine is put on the little two-wheeled 
trolley and taken back to its " stable."
Very early next morning we are out on the flying ground 
again. By this time groups have sorted themselves according 
to age, temperament and talent. Ten or twelve men to a 
teacher is about the right number.
To-day there is a light breeze, and we proceed once more 
to the slight slope, where each pupil tries a " hop " in which 
he uses his controls as little as possible. Most of them show 
signs of improvement.
Then I set them a new task. " As you have learnt to 
take it easy, try a start from this six foot elevation, and 
practise all the steering movements, one after the other. 
First the elevator ; start, fly quite quietly for a moment, 
then push the stick down a bit. Take it quite easily, and 
don't move it more than the least fraction. 
Before you land, 
pull it a bit to decrease the shock, and you'll see how beauti- 
fully the machine answers to the least touch. When you 
have done it all right, try the ailerons, but take care to 
avoid all other steering movements in order to realize the 
operation of that one alone."
They soon do it quite well, Then comes the rudder, 
which is every beginner's bugbear.
" Do what I will, I always get out of the straight course 
without meaning to do so ; I lose my fixed point," someone 
complains.
" Just notice how each man sits and what he does with his 
feet," I advise them. And so they all observe that the 
pupil about to start is pushing the rudder bar convulsively

--- PAGE 202 ---
THE GLIDING AND SOARING SCHOOL 153
before he has left the ground. In the air he makes matters 
worse by kicking it savagely  as though trying to break it.
Most people have one leg a little stronger than the other, 
and perhaps the man is not sitting quite straight in his 
seat ; at all events one foot is thrust too far forward, and so 
he steers lopsidedly and uses so much force that he loses 
all power of feeling its movement. All through his flight 
he is fighting against his own strength, while the machine 
calmly goes its own way.
" Why ? " a pupil will ask.
" Sheer nerves/' I reply. " Everyone is afraid of falling 
from his seat unless he plants his feet firmly against some- 
thing. 
Strap yourself well in ; now try before you sit down 
to lift your foot up from the rudder bar. That's right ! 
You must gain a quite fine touch and be able to play with 
all the controls."
Often, however, errors in lateral steering have other 
explanations. In a flying machine change of direction is 
obtained in exactly the opposite way from that used in a 
motor car, motor cycle or bicycle. If we want to turn to the 
right we must push the lateral control to the right and for- 
wards not backwards as we do with the steering apparatus 
of vehicles on the ground.
All day long pupils start again and again, and now 
we answer all their questions promptly. One of them, 
who promises well, can already fly from ninety to one 
hundred and twenty, or even as much as one hundred 
and eighty feet. After every flight the pupil must report 
himself to his teacher, and recount his impressions and 
listen to our criticisms. It is forbidden to discuss the 
flight first with fellow pupils.
From his behaviour in the air and from what he tells us 
we can speedily form an opinion as to the improvement 
in his powers of reaction and observation, but there are 
often pupils who do not know in the least what they do or 
how they do it, and yet do just the right thing unconsciously.
" You will be a real flyer when you dream of steering, 
for such dreams will show that flying has become a true 
part of your subconscious self/' we tell them.
And here we find a way to help even untalented pupils

--- PAGE 203 ---
154 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
to learn to fly. There is in every group at least one who 
has no flying sense whatever, or who thinks and acts very 
slowly ; and often just such pupils are the most diligent 
and enthusiastic.
At first none of them can make calm and accurate observa- 
tions. Instead of the sky they see " blue," instead of a 
meadow, " green." But later, sometimes after only two 
or three " hops " their minds are freed from nervous 
misgivings and they see the sky with its clouds, the horizon 
and the landing place.
But not all are so fortunate. One says : " I can't do 
things so quickly ; before I can see or do anything I am 
on the ground again."
When practice fails to benefit a backward pupil, there 
is only one chance for him, and that is to learn to fly by 
pure reason. He must form in his mind an accurate 
picture of every movement he has to make in the machine. 
" This you must do partly from my explanations," I tell 
him, " and partly from what you observe when others 
fly. The condition of the machine, its position in the air, 
yourself, the control lever, the rudder-bar you must be 
able to picture them all clearly in your mind's eye. For 
example, describe your impressions of what happens when 
the machine rears."
" The horizon disappears downwards ; I can't see the 
ground, only sky."
" What must you do in such a case ? "
11 Push the stick forward."
" Good, but that is not enough. With your eyes shut, 
at any moment, wherever you may be, you must see the 
steering movements just as clearly as if you were sitting 
in the machine. You can practise while you are eating or 
in the tram or in the pauses of your daily work. You must 
do that until by constant mental practice the movements 
become second nature to you by passing into your flesh 
and blood, so to speak."
Talented pupils learn the correct use of the controls by 
merely spending a few moments in the machine, but the 
man who acquires no flying sense instinctively must 
conquer his difficulties by the aid of his mind. We know

--- PAGE 204 ---
HE TURNS TO THE RIGHT*
HOW TO STEER
RELO OF VISION
LEFT FOOT FORWARD!
41.
FLIGHT TOO RAPID !
HOW "TO STEER
FIELD OF VISION
R.
Facing page 154

--- PAGE 205 ---
i:
X
NOISIA =10 cnaidi
I | 
ot—**
tT33JS OJL AVON
i nvis

--- PAGE 206 ---
THE GLIDING AND SOARING SCHOOL 155
that some celebrated aviators, including many stunting 
experts, always visualize their most complicated evolutions 
in the mind's eyes before they attempt to carry them out. 
This power of visualization is a very effective help in time 
of trouble, when perhaps a number of different actions have 
to be performed in a few seconds. In such cases the more 
that can be done at the prompting of the subconscious self 
or as the result of mental training, the freer will be the 
pilot's body and mind to grapple with the situation and so 
save his life.
The beginner who encounters a sudden gust and the 
experienced pilot who finds himself confronted with a wall 
of rock when flying in a fog experience similar sensations. 
Each is up against a problem that calls for the utmost 
exertion of all his skill and knowledge, and the time allowed 
him to make up his mind is all too short. But the man 
who has pictured such a situation a thousand times in his 
mind's eye will do the right thing instinctively, and, better 
still, his actions will not be complicated by the intervention 
of that most dangerous element fear.
This is a great comfort for all who are not born Lind- 
berghs. Any one can learn to fly well if he perseveres and 
exerts his will power, even if he lacks the instinctive sense 
to which we have already referred.
An old pilot who had occasion to note the success 
of this method with an untalented pupil once said to me:
" Now I know why, when his machine suddenly fails 
him and goes into a spin or a vertical dive, one man will 
see all his past life before him and trust to luck, while 
another turns off the benzine switch, cuts off his ignition or 
counteracts the failure of one control by judicious use of 
another while all the time his eye is searching the ground 
for the spot on which to make the best possible landing 
if the worst comes to the worst."
On our third day of instruction the breeze freshens 
considerably, and the pupils rise higher and higher ; one 
even reaches a height of thirty feet or so.
" It's funny," another informs me, uthat you don't notice 
the steps by which you learn to fly. Only yesterday my 
brain would have reeled at the thought of things which

--- PAGE 207 ---
156 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
to-day gradual practice has made seem quite natural to me."
And now the air currents become very irregular, which 
is a good thing because their vagaries will give the pupils 
an excellent opportunity to learn how much the school 
plane can do by itself and when it is necessary for them to 
intervene.
Everyone is now accustomed to the new life, and it is 
delightful to witness the growth of comradeship amongst 
the pupils. The formation of groups, all of which are 
instructed on the same slope, has the great advantage of 
rousing a healthy spirit of emulation. Each group strives 
to achieve more than the others.
By the evening of this third day most of our pupils have 
taken a big step forward : some can fly nine hundred to 
twelve hundred feet over gently sloping ground when things 
go right.
Unluckily one man shows us at the last moment how not 
to do it. It is not often that anyone pulls the machine 
right over, though this is about the worst mistake that a 
flyer can make. The danger lies in the fact that the control 
lever of a plane which has been brought almost to a standstill 
by being pulled up too violently loses its motive power. 
A motor boat can only be steered while it is under way, and 
a motorless airplane, if pulled up too forcibly, is bound to 
lose speed after a short time, just as a ball which rolled uphill 
only goes a short distance, stands still for a fraction of a 
second and then rolls backwards. The flying machine does 
precisely the same thing.
Through carelessness a pupil had pulled the stick too 
hard. Flying sense says " Push," but when a beginner 
finds himself hanging in mid air, his nerves scream out 
" Hold tight." This pupil afterwards said : "I only 
wanted to hold on to something, and as there was nothing 
else at hand I held on to and so pulled the control lever."
Bump ! 
There lay the plane ! while the flyer rolled over 
and over on the grass.
" What ought I to have done ? " he asked quite down- 
hearted.
" First of all you must not let the machine get into such 
a dangerous position. When you are flying close the ground,

--- PAGE 208 ---
THE GLIDING AND SOARING SCHOOL 157
you have not sufficient height to gain speed by pushing the 
stick over and diving, because you will crash before you 
can even out again."
Our dear old " Zogling " was so badly damaged that 
there could be no more thought of practice at the moment. 
Both main spars of one wing were broken, and the pupils 
sorrowfully dismantled the machine to convey it to the 
workshop. But before we departed we had a good opportu- 
nity to observe in the work of the other two groups that 
were practising on the same slope the other two great faults 
which, together with over-pulling, form the trinity of 
beginners' worst mistakes.
A " Zogling " started and flew quite smoothly at first, 
but all of a sudden its pilot, who till then had been 
calmly gazing ahead at the horizon, glanced down at the 
earth beneath him, and we saw at once how it affected his 
nerves. Twice, three times he pulled, then he pushed and 
crashed the machine against the ground. He pushed the 
stick so hard that the shock of a very rough landing burst 
his safety belt, and he flew almost farther without his machine 
than he had ever flown with it.
" I looked at the ground to see how my machine was 
flying," he told his teacher, who was surveying the result 
with a not exactly friendly expression,
" You know quite well that you were told to look steadily 
at the horizon," was the answer. " To fly by your distance 
from the ground is one of the very worst mistakes a beginner 
can make. It can be done in an emergency over very 
gently sloping ground ; it is even possible under certain 
circumstances to fly down a slope at a level height of three 
feet above the earth if the gradient chances to correspond 
exactly to that of the angle of your flight. 
But it's all 
up with anyone who gets into the habit of doing this sort 
of thing if he suddenly finds himself over a steep drop, for 
he loses all possibility of controlling his position when the 
ground which he has been skimming seems to fall into an 
abyss. That's the end of his flying for a very long time.
" Moreover, every flyer is frightened when he looks down 
suddenly and realizes his own height for the first time. It was 
the shock of this which caused you to lose control just now."

--- PAGE 209 ---
158 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
The other error was just as instructive in a negative 
sense. Even before the pupil started we noticed how 
frequently he looked at his control lever. The teacher 
showed him its right position, but again and again he cast 
stolen glances at it. When taking off he was thrown a 
little out of his proper position by the slight jerk which 
accompanies the start, but he did not notice it. He was not 
looking at the horizon, he paid no attention to flying con- 
ditions, but kept staring at the lever in order to maintain it 
in what he took to be the correct position. 
So anxiously 
and attentively did he concentrate upon it that he never 
noticed how rapidly he was approaching the ground. There 
followed a cracking and splintering of wood and the 
machine was temporarily out of action.
" You will never make a pilot if you keep on gazing at 
your stick," the delinquent was told. " You must feel 
it while observing your machine's position in the air and 
steer accordingly. If you want to pilot an engine-driven 
machine one day, you will have to learn that you cannot 
fly with your eyes on your stick, the correct position of 
which must vary in accordance with the number of your 
passengers, their positions in the machine, the weight of 
their luggage and various other circumstances. In a 
gliding machine it is just as bad to keep your eyes on the 
stick, because you will find it engrossing your attention 
so much that you have no time to look at anything else. 
Your stick geometry will cramp your style and prevent you 
from acquiring a proper air-sense."
Those were our first accidents during this course, and 
nobody took them tragically. The velocity of our school 
machine does not exceed that of a skier going at full speed, 
while a fall on frozen snow with the long runners firmly 
buckled to the feet is decidedly severer than that of a glider 
on to grass or sandy ground not to speak of the dangerous 
falls which motor cyclists experience every day. All our 
pupils know this, and therefore every accident is treated as 
a great joke by the victim's comrades, and good humoured 
sarcastic criticisms pass from one group to another until an 
instructor orders silence.
" We have fooled enough," he says, " now we will look

--- PAGE 210 ---
THE GLIDING AND SOARING SCHOOL 159
at the matter very seriously for once. We have seen what 
inborn flying ability you all have, and probably by now each 
one of you has a good idea of his own capacity. And now 
that you have recognized the problems which arise in the 
course of practical work we will consider them carefully. 
First we shall deal with the most important of all :
" The correct flying position."
" How do we recognize the correct flying position ? "
" By the position of the plane with respect to the horizon," 
says one. Another : "By the regular rhythm of the hum- 
ming of the wires in the wind."
" Right! But that is not all ? "
" Also/' said one," I felt a difference in the strength of the 
draught on my face when I pulled or pushed more violently."
" You see then that there are many ways of judging 
whether your machine is flying at the right speed. We 
can make some use of nearly all our senses in flying. 
By 
them, too, we can distinguish between different methods.
" First comes the eye; it is the best measurer of dips. 
It can determine precisely whether the horizon divides the 
field of vision in the middle, and whether it wanders up- 
wards or downwards or perhaps disappears altogether 
according to the extent which you pull or push the stick. 
This kind of observation is the easiest for beginners. You 
can see the horizon before you in just the same way whether 
you are fifteen feet or three thousand feet high. As long 
as you see the horizon you will never get nervous about 
your height. You have seen for yourselves the consequences 
of regulating your flight by your distance from the ground.
" If you now take some object on the horizon as a fixed 
point to guide you, it will tell you whether you are dipping 
to one or the other side. If you want to fly straight ahead 
and your fixed point seems to move to the right or to the 
left, you must apply your lateral steering apparatus on the 
side in question until you have it quite straight before you 
again."
" But if we only look at the horizon, we shall never see 
if we are approaching the ground/' somebody objects.
" That is not the case. Nature has given the human eye 
so wide an angle of vision that what you say is not accurate.

--- PAGE 211 ---
i6o 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
Even while you are watching the horizon intently, you will 
know immediately if you approach the ground. It will 
rise from below into your field of vision and so inform you 
that it is time to think of landing. But it would not be 
very serious if you failed to notice it. For our landings 
are quite different from those of the motor-flyer. Gliding 
and soaring planes have no high undercarriages, so that 
you do not need to pull the stick as hard as the pilots of 
engine-driven planes, who must bring wheels and tail skid 
to the ground at the same time and at their lowest speed. 
The motor-pilot has only one form of landing which 
corresponds to ours. He calls it a wheel-landing, by which 
he implies that he comes to the ground with his machine 
almost in its normal position. We always land in this way 
in gliding and soaring. Therefore it would be no great 
misfortune if you were simply to touch the ground in your 
normal flying position, though you would land more 
gently if you made some preparations.
" Long experience of training work tells us that this 
* fixed point' method is the best for the normal beginner, 
though later you will learn its drawbacks. If you are 
flying in mountainous country or in fog, in clouds or by 
night, you often cannot see the horizon. He who knows 
no other method will then be at a loss unless he can call 
upon his sense of hearing for assistance.
" Every airplane is musical; it varies its notes in accordance 
with the movements of the air. If you push the stick your 
plane moves more quickly and the humming or whistling 
in the bracing wires will increase. If you pull the stick the 
plane moves more slowly, and the music grows dim. As 
long as the wires are humming normally nothing can go 
wrong. When you begin to make a turn the wires have a 
different sound which is easy to distinguish from that of 
normal flight conditions. Also when you side-slip, you 
generally hear a different tone. Not everyone hears all 
these different notes so clearly, but even otherwise un- 
musical people notice at once if the sounds around them die 
away or cease. Then it is high time to push the stick over,
and it is the best way of knowing that you have pulled too
i_ » 
much.

--- PAGE 212 ---
THE GLIDING AND SOARING SCHOOL 161
" But what about a plane that is not braced with wires  
one that has a cantilever wing or only struts ? "
" Even then there are sounds. On every plane there is 
something which vibrates to its motion. Even the tiny 
eddies that form in the cockpit or round the flyer's head 
sing their tune, though on good machines the music is not 
so loud. But he who flies in them will already have 
had so much experience that he no longer needs the great 
orchestra of Aeolian harps which every wire-braced flying 
machine is.
" This acoustic method never fails us. You may fly by it 
through clouds, or through night and fog, where the eye 
can distinguish nothing, or in the mountains, where the 
view is limited. If you have practised it long enough, you 
can always hear how your plane is flying.
" One drawback to this method is that each individual 
machine has a different tone. You must familiarize yourself 
with the music of each new plane you fly. There are 
variations according to whether the machine is speedy or 
slow, whether it has many wires or few or none. Often, 
too, the sense of hearing grows dull during a long flight. 
Then you distinguish only differences in tone but lose all 
power to comprehend their exact meaning. Where there 
are other noises which may easily overpower these, as for 
instance, the roar of an engine, your acoustic sense may let 
you down entirely.
"And now for the sense of touch ! In soaring, owing to 
your open-air seat, you have an excellent opportunity to 
feel the currents on your face. Darkness and fog make no 
difference, but temperature and moisture do. We generally 
think a cold wind much stronger than a warm one, and a 
moist one differs from a dry one. But if rain or snow lashes 
our faces, all power of discrimination vanishes/'
" Why don't we just fly by the sense of balance which we 
have so strongly on the ground ? " a pupil now asks.
" Of that sense we can also make good use, but it is not 
nearly so useful in the air as on the ground ; it may even 
lead us astray, so that we form a deduction which is the 
exact opposite of the true one.
" Often we feel the position of a plane quite clearly and
M

--- PAGE 213 ---
162 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
correctly by means of this sense. We notice that when we 
are climbing our legs are higher and our bodies slant backward. 
In the same way we also feel whether the machine's nose is 
dipping or whether we are ' hanging/ that is to say, 
whether the machine is in a slanting position. These things, 
of course, we can feel when lying on the ground or sitting 
in a chair.
" But this sense is only of use so long as it is not subjected 
to accelerated motion, as the physicists call it. 
By this I 
mean motion by which the velocity is constantly changing, 
or when the direction of the motion is altered, as is the case 
when we put the machine into a turn.
" You know that a cyclist must lean inwards when turning 
so as to avoid falling over outwards. In a motor-car, which 
cannot lean over, you are pressed against that side of the 
car which is to the outside of the curve. If you whirl 
round and round on a merry-go-round, you will be pressed 
against your seat in just the same way when it stops. A 
pendulum held in your hand would not point to the earth 
but slantingly outwards. If you shut your eyes, you could 
not say correctly, by your sense of equilibrium, which direc- 
tion was upward and which was downward.
" This is the case with flying turns. Gravitation is not the 
only force acting upon us; it is accompanied by another 
force which acts outwards. This centrifugal force compels 
us, if we are to fly correctly, to put our machine into a 
turn. On this same force depends the success of the trick 
that you often see in a circus the 'looping the loop' stunt. 
Centrifugal force continually presses the car, in which the 
daring artiste sits, against the rails ; gravity appears to be 
suspended ; it seems as though it was superseded by an 
attractive force that works outwards from the centre in all 
directions. Flying loops correspond to these circus loops ; 
if you fly them correctly, you do not need your safety belt. 
Whatever your position may be, you will be pressed against 
your seat. If you shut your eyes, you will notice no difference 
from a straight flight, at least you will be unable to say 
whether you are flying up or down.
" If you are in a lift which is just beginning to rise, you 
feel yourself to be much heavier than you really are ; if

--- PAGE 214 ---
44. 
STALLING : 
THE MOST DANGEROUS FAULT COMMITTED BY BEGINNERS
(Note the hurried ilight of the starting1 crew, who realize that the machine is likely
to crash)
Facing page 102

--- PAGE 215 ---
45. 
THE FUSELAGE OF THE MUNICH ACADEMIC FLYING GROUP'S
"KAKADU"
Facing page 163

--- PAGE 216 ---
THE GLIDING AND SOARING SCHOOL 163
it descends, you suddenly become lighter. In a flying 
machine these sensations are intensified, and so our sense 
of balance may lead us very much astray. You imagine 
yourself turning, whereas in reality you are flying straight 
ahead, or you turn without realizing it and still think the 
machine is flying as straight as an arrow. These are the 
mistakes that you will make if you rely entirely on your 
sense of balance, and by night or in a fog you will be 
continually at fault.
" So your sense of balance, which is your best guide on 
the ground, may be the very worst one when you are 
moving through the air."
" But on the ground we find our way about in the dark by 
groping before us with our hands and feet. Is there any 
similar sense to aid us when we are flying ? "
" We can gain such help from the stick. The counter- 
pressure of the air on the stick always tells the experienced 
flyer whether he has pulled or pushed it too far, whether 
his machine is flying straight or going into a turn, and, 
above all, what is his exact position at the moment. Even 
if all other senses were to fail him, he could still tell what 
he ought to do by the pressure exercised upon the stick. 
He could feel at once if he had pulled it over too much, 
because the resistance to its manipulation would diminish 
considerably, and so he would realize that it was high time 
to push it back again.
" Of course, these effects differ with different machines. 
In big, heavy motor-planes it is easier to feel your way by 
sensitive manipulation of the stick. In a light glider the 
steering forces are often very weak, which is the reason 
why pilots of heavy motor craft experience such difficulties 
when they first learn gliding."
" Must we learn all this if we want to fly ? " asks someone.
" Certainly, in all cases where the learner has to rely on 
head work instead of a natural air sense if he is to fly at all ; 
trained flyers can also refine and develop their air sense by 
means of such knowledge. It is a fact that everyone flies 
by intellect or sense ; often h~ does not know by which. 
One pilot relies mainly on h' eyes, another on his ears ; 
this one pays greater attention to his sense of balance, that

--- PAGE 217 ---
164 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
one to the pressure on his stick. But no one really flies 
simply and solely by one method ; though most people 
rely mainly upon one and call others to assist them in 
case of need."
" But there are instruments which show us everything 
accurately. Why should we not make use of them when 
we are learning ? "
" Because if you do, you will never acquire the correct 
flying sense. 
Indeed, a most usual mistake made by young 
pilots is their blind dependence on the instruments in their 
machines which leads them to forget much of which they 
have taken so much trouble to learn. It is far more impor- 
tant to train yourself to fly first by the eye alone, then by the 
ear alone, then by your sense of balance and pressure on 
the stick. He who can use one or other of these senses 
is a flyer ; he who can make use of more than one at the 
same time is a good flyer ; he who has them all unconsciously 
is a very good pilot. But he only becomes a Master in the 
air who dominates it by means of all his senses equally, 
by a combination of instinct and intellect, which acts 
both consciously and unconsciously."
Such short explanatory conversations are always encour- 
aged in our flying instruction. Owing to their close con- 
nection with the constant practice in which everything that 
is expounded can be tested practically the words of the 
teacher gain real significance in the minds of his pupils.
All the early period of instruction is for the pupil an 
intense conflict against obstacles of his own creation. 
Fear and nervousness suffice to make flying difficult, but 
we have had pupils who were free from both ; these simply 
seated themselves in a machine and flew.
" Fly ? 
Of course I can," said one of them once after 
his first " hop," " there's nothing remarkable in that ; 
it comes of itself, quite naturally." He passed all his 
tests in a shorter time than any other pupil because from 
the very beginning he had the flying sense and reacted to it.
Others must first grow used to the new element through 
practice. 
In their first flight they see and hear nothing, 
but after some practice one sense after the other is liberated.
At last they become expert steerers, and one morning

--- PAGE 218 ---
THE GLIDING AND SOARING SCHOOL 165
the instructor wakens them with : " To-day the wind is 
right for your first gliding test."
They are out of bed in no time !
The first test consists of a flight of thirty seconds duration 
along a suitable slope ; flying the usual school machine, 
the candidate must attain a height of at least one hundred 
and thirty feet above the landing place.
The first candidate starts well, but as soon as he is over 
the steeper slant of the slope, he begins to push sharply. 
He shoots down the incline at an unvarying height of about 
thirty feet, and cannot even his machine out until he is 
once more above level ground.
" What was wrong ? " ask the astonished pupils.
" He has not yet broken himself of flying by his distance 
above the ground," the instructor replies. " He flew 
parallel with the slope just now because he had no fixed 
point on the horizon to guide him."
The next does better. He starts calmly, with his fixed 
point kept constantly in view, and has no trouble with the 
little puffs of gentle breeze. Then comes something that 
upsets his calculations, for the height of the slope is suffi- 
cient to engender an upward air current, which he en- 
counters soon after his start. It lifts him and renders him 
uneasy because he is unaware of its nature ; he thinks that 
he has caused his ascent by unconscious pulling at the 
stick and therefore pushes it over. He thus loses height so 
rapidly that he has to come down after a flight of twenty- 
five seconds.
" How can you know if you are pulling or if it is an 
upward current that lifts you ? "he asks.
" If you pull the stick, the tail drops and the machine's 
nose rises. The machine alters its position with regard to 
the horizon. But in an upward current the machine's 
position with regard to the horizon remains constant. 
You have your fixed point before you and climb without 
aid from the stick. This is the beginning of soaring, and 
you see now how important it is to keep the elevator as 
steady as possible and not to change your relative position 
to the fixed point."
At last one candidate does well. He glides along quite

--- PAGE 219 ---
166 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
calmly, manipulating his controls almost imperceptibly. 
A puff of wind deflects him a little to one side, but he quickly 
makes use of the opposite lateral control and the machine 
rights itself. Now a small gust lifts him, and now he drops 
towards the ground. You can plainly see him pulling. 
Twenty-eight seconds have passed, according to my stop 
watch. He is still in the air. Twenty-nine seconds. Will 
he manage it ? 
He drifts lightly over the gently rising 
ground. Thirty, says the watch. But he contrives to 
fly across a little hollow. Thirty-one, thirty-two . . . thirty- 
five. Hurrah ! 
Now he has landed smoothly. The first 
successful flight for the " A " badge has been flown !
And now, what excitement! Everyone congratulates 
him ! 
Everyone wants to be the next to pass his test!
The successful candidate needed only nine practice flights 
to qualify for his " A " badge, and the beginners are delighted 
to see that one can really fly after only a few flights in 
glider.
The tests continue. As many mistakes are made as it 
is possible to make. One pushes too much ; another pulls 
and drops down ; yet another, who has been flying quite 
well, feels suddenly nervous when he is over the " high " 
slope.
Another starts well, but makes a left hand turn too 
slowly. He steers to the right, but the machine does not 
respond ; in spite of his efforts, it continually pushes a bit 
round to the left.
" And yet I always managed the rudder quite correctly/' 
he complained later.
" All the same you made a mistake which beginners often 
make," said the teacher. " Which of you followed his 
flight carefully ? 
Did anyone notice what was wrong ? "
Only one had observed the error. " The machine hung 
a bit to the left while he was trying to steer it in the other 
direction, " said he.
" That is the explanation of your mistake. As long as a 
glider hangs to one side it is impossible to turn it in the 
other direction by means of your lateral controls. The 
machine must first lie on a perfectly even keel, which it 
can be made to do by the right use of the ailerons, then only

--- PAGE 220 ---
CLIMBING PLIGHT OF A SOARING PLANE
THE PILOT HOLDS THE 
MACHINE ON AN EVEN 
KEEL. AJMD IT CLIMBS 
ONLV BV UPWIND 
TO ITSELP
CLIMBING PLIGHT OP A MOTOR 
PLANE. 
TVCE PILOT PULL*.
46.
Facing page'ICO

--- PAGE 221 ---
AN OBSTACLE IN THE COURSE OF THE FLIGHT
TOO SOON WOULD MEAN
UPON "H-C
47.
0 VSX7NFELD
Fticitit> piixt

--- PAGE 222 ---
THE GLIDING AND SOARING SCHOOL 167
can you use your lateral controls with any effect. When 
they do not produce the desired effect, you must turn your 
ailerons in the same direction."
Thus the instructor must always render patient and 
tactful assistance to his pupils. Each one has a different 
grievance and wants some kind of special treatment. Already 
at this early stage the well-known types of flyers are beginning 
to develop ; there are the bold ones, the careful ones, the 
shy ones, the man who flies roughly and the one who hardly 
trusts himself to move the control lever. The advice that 
helps one is useless to another. Even the most expert 
teacher has never finished learning.
But progress is being made more rapidly in one case, 
more slowly in another ; in the end they all learn the 
beginnings of gliding.
Their senses which hitherto have been sorely oppressed 
are now liberated. They begin to see how the ground 
sinks beneath them, how the portion of earth which it is 
possible for them to see gradually extends as they rise, 
how a bird in front of them lets itself be carried higher by 
a gust just as they themselves do. They begin to hear 
how the wires sing, how the machine crackles, how the birds 
cry. They begin to feel how lightly they must steer and 
with what lightning speed and how strongly at certain 
moments, how the machine dances in every breath of air, 
and how every inequality of the ground throws up a different 
air current.
And so we begin to think that we are on the way to the 
conquest of a new world, which was formerly dead and 
empty for us. A new, living, manifold world the Air!

--- PAGE 223 ---
ON THE WAY TO THE " B " TEST
I
T does everyone good to gain the " A " badge, but this 
cannot be called a real test. It may rather be regarded 
as something in the nature of an incitement to further 
efforts.
The straight flights of the successful candidates take 
place over a gentle slope, the fall of which is hardly more 
pronounced than that of the taking-off ground. 
If you 
were to put a sandbag in the machine instead of a human 
being and fix the controls in neutral, it would easily make a 
flight of thirty seconds duration on a calm day without 
human intervention.
This says much for the flight powers of our beginners' 
machines, but no sandbag could do what the candidate for 
the " B " badge must now learn to do. Let us hear the 
words of the instructor on this point.
" We will now proceed to teach you curving flight, by 
which I mean that you must learn to change your course in 
the air deliberately. You will have to learn this gradually 
and by easy steps, and I want you to begin by starting off 
as quietly as if you were going to make one of the straight 
flights you are accustomed to. But when you feel you have 
the machine well under control, try to put it into a right- 
hand turn, and then, a bit after, have a shot at a left-hand 
turn."
The first pupil starts. His manipulation of the controls 
is somewhat hesitant, but you can see that he effects some 
slight change of direction. " I nearly lost all my bearings," 
he tells us afterwards. 
" I am so used to keeping my 
fixed point in sight, and when I turned, I lost it. I was 
so busy with the machine that I could not look where I was 
going. It was a lucky thing I was so near the ground ; 
otherwise the machine could have taken me just where it 
wanted. When you are making a number of turns, how 
can you be sure of reaching your destination ? "
168

--- PAGE 224 ---
ON THE WAY TO THE "B" TEST 
169
" The best way is to make a definite plan before you 
start. That fixed point is a splendid help to beginners, 
and hitherto we have only let you undertake straight 
flights because we did not want you to fly over ground that 
would have been bad for landing on or go into unintentional 
turns. But now you must learn to move freely in the air, 
and if you are to have a proper control over your machine, 
you will have to learn to keep the whole horizon in view 
instead of merely one fixed point on it. To get your bear- 
ings correctly, choose some landmark on the ground. Fly 
to it ; then pick out another and try to reach that ; by 
practice you will eventually acquire such skill that you will 
be able to find your way about anywhere."
The pupil does not find it at all easy at first. As his 
turns or rather, his efforts to turn cause him to lose height, 
he has to take off over a more pronounced slope. He finds 
it quite uncomfortable to be flying some 150 feet above the 
ground.
When he has shown that he is sufficiently expert in the 
use of his steering-gear to carry out the exercises set him, 
he can begin to learn real turns.
The instructor tells him : " When you want to change 
your direction quickly, you have to use the rudder as well 
as the stick, but do not move it more than just enough to 
make the machine turn in the required direction."
The pupil who starts off after these words of advice 
generally takes them too seriously to heart. He wants 
to do a really good turn, but he is hardly off the ground 
before he kicks the rudder violently and pushes the stick 
hard over at the same time. The plane dips sharply as 
it turns, and next moment it strikes an attitude which would 
be a feat for any stunt pilot. But it is too much for our 
bold beginner ; we note his dismay by the sudden jerks 
of his steering gear, but luckily his Zogling is a patient 
bird ! 
He begins to side-slip, but luckily catches himself 
at the right moment before reaching the ground, and 
escapes with no worse consequences than a fright.
" That is a good examp'e for you all. There is one rule 
to be observed in all turns made by gliders and soarers, 
and that is : keep your machine as level as possible. The

--- PAGE 225 ---
170 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
slighter your angle of bank is, the better you will turn. 
This is quite a different business from turning an engine- 
driven machine, which has to be banked over steeply for 
its turns on account of the greater weight and greater flying 
speed. I can easily make this clear to you by the example 
of vehicles driven on the ground. The heavier a motor-car 
is, and the greater its speed, the more a racing track must be 
banked at the turns in order to ensure safety at full speed. 
In the same way, the smaller the radius within which you 
turn, the more steep your angle of bank must be. The 
soaring plane is so light, its speed so low, that we can fly 
our turns perfectly with a surprisingly slight bank."
The performance of another pupil gives us still further 
food for thought. 
We saw clearly that he kept the 
machine perfectly steady till he had to apply his rudder. 
For whatever reason he used it whether to dodge a gust 
or make a turn he always moved his elevator as well, 
with the result that the plane made very remarkable leaps 
through the air.
" I don't know why, but I can't keep the elevator still 
when I have to use the rudder/' he said.
" The reason is an anatomical one," I answered. " All 
the movements of the human limbs are more or less circular 
ones around a pivot. When you hold your arm as you do 
when grasping your control lever and then move your 
hand to the right or left, you will, quite unconsciously, 
describe an arc of a circle round your elbow, and thus you 
unconsciously move the elevator. To avoid this here's 
something you can practise quite well in the machine on 
the ground you must take particular care to move your 
hand backwards and forwards to the one side or the other 
in an exactly straight line when you push the stick 
sideways."
" How comes it that it is possible in the right type of 
machine to turn by use of the rudder only ? "
" When you steer sideways, the plane begins to turn in 
the required direction. The result is that the wing which 
lies on the outside of the curve moves through the air more 
quickly than the one on the inside. The same principle 
applies to a squad of men drilling ; when the order is

--- PAGE 226 ---
ON THE WAY TO THE " B " TEST 
171
given to ' right wheel/ the outside man of the line must 
almost run, while the inmost hardly moves at all. Now the 
wing which moves more rapidly through the air increases 
its ascending power; it rises while the other does not, and 
so the plane assumes the correct angle of bank automatically."
Slowly but surely our pupils amend their errors. The 
matter which requires the most attention is the combination 
of ailerons and rudder in steering.
" Right foot forward, hand to the right! Left foot 
forward, hand to the left! You must practise that. Get 
clear in your mind what you have to do in every position ; 
that is the chief rule for turns."
" What would be the result if rudder and ailerons were 
working against each other ? " a pupil asks.
Let us suppose that you push the stick over to the left ; 
your plane will want to turn in that direction. But you 
steer to the right with your rudder, you would naturally 
turn the machine to the right and make it dip in that 
direction. The two steering-gears neutralize each other, 
the exposed steering surfaces now act as brakes and speed 
steadily decreases until the plane comes to a standstill, just as 
it does when you overpull. If you do not soon realize your 
mistake, it will stand on its head and whirl down to the 
ground. This most unpleasant consequence of one of the 
worst of all flying errors is called a spin.
The next pupil tries to turn, but he does not move his 
machine round.
4'As I was turning, I suddenly felt the air blowing in my 
face, both from in front and from the side, from the outer 
side. At the same time I was pressed outward against my 
seat. What was the reason ? "
" By your mistake you have found out one way in which 
it is possible to ascertain whether you have made a good 
or a bad turn. A rush of wind from the side is always a 
sign of something wrong if you are supposed to be flying 
normally. It only occurs when the machine's forward 
movement through the air is not perfectly straight, but just 
the slightest bit askew. We call that ' shoving/ and it is 
bound to occur in a turn where the angle of bank is too slight. 
You see the same thing on a racing track that is not banked

--- PAGE 227 ---
172 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
high enough at the turns the car skids outwards. This 
oblique movement is characterized by a side draught, while 
at the same time centrifugal force tends to push you away 
from your seat because you have not banked over with your 
plane in proportion to the force acting on you.
" But the exact opposite can also occur ; you may feel 
a side wind from the inside and even be drawn inwards. 
This happens when your bank is too steep.
" A rightly flown turn must be such that if you had a 
small pendulum hanging before you it would always be 
at a right angle to your planes, just as it would be in a 
straight flight. You may take it as a rule that whenever 
you feel a side-draught from the inside you must decrease 
the angle of your bank ; when the draught occurs on the 
outside, you must increase it."
And so our schooling goes on, day by day. We do not 
fly too far, because we do not want the trouble of carrying 
the machine back for long distances up hills. It is greatly 
to our advantage that the wind often changes at this time, 
because all the pupils are thus able to practise gliding on 
different slopes of our mountain. They grow quite 
independent of the lie of the ground and no longer need to 
work their way from one fixed point to another.
Let us watch one of them start. He glances at the 
horizon. His position is correct. 
Now he looks round 
calmly to choose a point round which he will curve. He 
is no longer worried if he sees the ground below him, 
because he now listens for the regular humming of the 
bracing-wires ; if it diminished excessively, he would use 
his stick automatically. Now he reaches his turning- 
point. He thinks : 
" Rudder, and stick over sideways 
a bit not too much ! 
Now I feel all right. 
I am pressed 
against my seat just as I am when I fly straight, I feel the 
draught quite normally, from in front; everything is as usual. 
I must go on turning steadily, now I am round, so push 
the controls back to their normal positions ! 
I am straight 
again and flying straight ahead. Now for the landing. 
Hallo ! there's a bush in the way ! 
No ! I am well past it." 
He now flies automatically by his flying sense, as every 
good airman should.

--- PAGE 228 ---
ON THE WAY TO THE " B " TEST 
173
The teacher is asked : " What do you do when there 
is an obstacle in the course which you cannot dodge ? "
" You ought to be able to answer that question for your- 
self by now."
" I should simply jump the machine over the obstacle," 
says one.
" I should land before I reached it," another suggests.
" I should push the stick down and then pull up again," 
a third opines.
" Why would you do that ? "asks the instructor. " What 
is your reason ? "
A heated discussion follows. 
Rival theories are champ- 
ioned with lively voices.
" I tried just now to fly over a hedge, and found myself 
sitting on it."
" Yes, but it's no good to land before reaching your 
obstacle. 
I tried, but only succeeded in running right into 
it," says an opponent of this theory.
" Let us test all these suggestions," says the instructor, 
and demonstrates them himself. A flag in the ground 
represents the obstacle.
Shortly before reaching the obstacle, he pulls as suggested. 
Everyone watches attentively how the plane lifts ; 
it 
certainly seems as if it will rise over the imaginary obstacle, 
but by pulling his stick, the pilot has reduced speed, and 
suddenly the plane flops and comes down none too gently, 
right on top of the flag.
The instructor now tests the suggestion to push. But a 
plane is bound to gain speed if pressed when flying down a 
slope, and can scarcely be brought to the ground. A small 
hollow in front of the flag makes landing impossible. 
Bump ! 
This time the sharp swing round drags the 
flag out.
" Lucky it wasn't a rock," say the spectators.
" If you could do it properly, it wouldn't matter if it 
were a rock," says the instructor. " I will prove it to 
you by flying straight for that heap of stones down there."
The pupils watch this flight somewhat anxiously, but 
just before reaching the stones the instructor drops the nose 
of the plane and heads for them as if he intended to ram

--- PAGE 229 ---
174 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
them. He even drops to a level below the top of the 
hillock ; they imagine they can hear the crash. But then 
he pulls his stick lightly; and the plane, which has gained 
great speed by the dive, reacts beautifully, and bounds 
straight into the air. 
At the very moment of crossing 
the obstacle, he pushes quickly ; the plane drops before it 
is over-pulled and lands smoothly.
" Fine ! Fine ! " cry all those who have been following 
the demonstration intently. " Like a man doing a high 
jump with a running start."
" Store up energy in the form of speed, and then use it 
when you need it," remarks the instructor when he gets 
back to the slope.
" To replace the reserve power which the pilot of a motor- 
plane possesses in his engine we must have height or speed 
reserve. They are, in a certain sense, equally valuable. 
By pushing, I can at any moment change my height into 
speed, while in an abnormally quick flight I can gain height 
by pulling at any moment. In both cases, this, of course, 
is only possible up to a certain degree. In all the difficult 
situations in which one may find oneself with a soarer it is 
well to have one or other of these reserves at your disposal. 
By pushing and accelerating speed, you can increase your 
steering capacity to such an extent that the machine will 
react to the slightest touch. Even if your impetus is not 
quite sufficient to carry you completely over the obstacle, 
you can make a fairly good finish by doirig what I did just 
now. If you find that you have not enough way on, or 
that the hill or bush is too high for you to clear, it is best 
to land upon it. 
By pulling at the last moment, you 
utilize the machine's impetus to the full and make your line 
of flight accommodate itself to the shape of the hindrance, 
while you finish by landing at the lowest possible speed. 
On rocks you might have some sort of a crash, but you 
would not do much damage. And that, by the way, is 
exactly how high-performance soarers land uphill.
" On the contrary it is quite wrong and very dangerous 
to try to land downhill ; it simply must not be attempted 
if there is any obstacle in front of you. If the slope of the 
ground is only a little more acute than the gliding angle of

--- PAGE 230 ---
ON THE WAY TO THE " B " TEST 
175
your plane, you cannot reach the ground, for you would 
increase your speed and ultimately crash or ram the obstacle.
" It is just as bad to pull when you have not much way 
on. The best that can happen then is, as you saw just 
now, that you drop down on the obstacle. But you would 
be more likely to stall or even spin, and probably over just 
the worst sort of ground. 
But in any case you would have 
poor control over your steering and probably over-pull 
just at the moment when extremely good steering was 
necessary. You would be left hanging quite helpless in 
the air."
At this stage of instruction it is not advisable to let 
pupils make their first turn too soon after the start, as such 
a procedure might easily bring unpractised flyers into 
collision with the slope. It is, therefore, all the more 
important to train the pupils to fly accurately round the 
chosen point, as only thus can they learn to exploit their 
knowledge fully, so that later on it may serve them in 
emergencies and in their training for soaring.
Before the real Gliding Test or " B " test is flown, the 
difference in the ability possessed by individual pupils will 
have become more pronounced than in the earlier stages. 
Most candidates generally pass this test after from fifteen 
to thirty starts, according to their ability.
A little wind is of benefit to the candidates, but, as is 
the case with gliding generally, it is not absolutely necessary.
A flight of one minute and an S-curve are required. 
Each pupil must previously have demonstrated sufficient 
skill in flying to warrant that his success will not be a matter 
of chance.
Nearly all test flights are rendered more difficult by the 
fact that the nervousness of the candidates, against which 
they have been struggling during the whole period of their 
training, breaks out again in the form of " test fever."
They start from a point situated a good four hundred 
and eighty feet above the goal, a height which should 
easily enable them to remain the requisite time in the air, 
even in our school machines. The slope over which they 
start is steep at first, but gradually becomes less pronounced

--- PAGE 231 ---
176 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
and finally evens out into the level ground of the landing 
field.
When he has started the candidate finds himself suddenly 
high in the air, and this is the undoing of those who fly 
by their distance from the ground instead of a fixed point 
on the horizon. One of these sinners rushes onwards at 
crazy speed, keeping his line of flight parallel with the slope 
beneath him ; later he follows the contours of the ground 
and ultimately reaches the goal, but his flight has been 
performed at such a pace that its duration is less than a 
minute. Others cannot manage their turns, and a third 
type goes off the course altogether.
The candidate who pulls too much flies at a low speed 
and contrives to remain his full minute in the air, but fails 
to reach the goal within this allotted time. The flight with 
the best gliding angle is a speedier affair than that performed 
with the lowest descending speed ; consequently the pilot 
who wants to cover long distances must be continually 
pushing, while the man who desires to spin out his time in 
the air will pull as much as he can compatibly with safety. 
When the conditions of flight involve both pulling and 
pushing the pilot must be able to sense the exact flying 
speeds he requires.
Most men find this quite easy, and indeed many pass the 
" B " test only a few flights after the " A " test.
The start for the " B " test is an energetic affair, in which 
there are often five or six men on each side of the rope. 
But now the candidates know something of the nature of 
upward gusts, which they can distinguish from the air 
movements set up by their own steering. Generally all 
goes well until they reach the first turning point and have 
flown round it. Then the ground rises up to meet them 
as they fly onward to the second turning point, where they 
have to curve away in the opposite direction in order to 
gain the straight run-in to the finish. As soon as a candidate 
feels himself certain of completing the course, he generally 
pulls a bit in order to prolong his time in the air. And 
then . . . my kingdom for a perfect landing. . . .
It's everyone's ambition to fly a " B " flight which lasts not 
merely sixty seconds but ninety or one hundred.

--- PAGE 232 ---
ON THE WAY TO THE " B " TEST 
177
Great is the rejoicing when the last pupil of a batch has 
passed his gliding test. And rightly so, for much has 
been attained.
We have learned to fly !
Many a man thus becomes a devotee of flying who could 
never have afforded to take an expensive course in a 
motor-flying school . . . likewise many a one who had 
only thought of enjoying some summer amusement. 
Pupils who have passed their gliding test have taken their 
seats in a light-motor aeroplane, and, after the few simple 
differences have been correctly explained to them, they have 
taken off and made perfect landings. Every student of 
gliding flight is more at home in the air than many who have 
learned to move in it in other ways.
When the gliding pupils shake hands as they say good- 
bye they know that they will see each other again somewhere 
in connection with flying. In motor-flight schools, at 
flying competitions, in every air port you will find men who 
began as gliders . . . equipped only with their pocket 
money from home and their enthusiasm.
Gliding is not merely a preparation for the new science 
of flight ; it is the most effective propaganda to popularize 
it with both young and old.
N

--- PAGE 233 ---
THE SOARING COURSE
*T JITHERTO we were gliders, but now we have come
I- I to learn soaring/' said one of the throng of young
JL 
JLpupils who had joined our Advanced Course.
" What is the difference between gliding and soaring ? "
" How do you manage to climb ? " come the questions.
To let them see with their own eyes is the best answer.
There is a good soaring wind ; I climb into the " Priifling,"
our machine for more advanced pupils, which is as speedy
and manoeuvrable as a small motor-plane. The wind is
blowing favourably at a right angle to the slope when I
start. I soar backwards and forwards above the same slope
from which the " B " tests were made. 
The pupils stand
below, having been instructed to watch as closely as possible.
I land at the top of the slope after a short flight of from ten
minutes to a quarter of an hour.
" Now what especially did you notice ? " asks the 
instructor.
" Chiefly that you do not lose height in soaring ! " 
" That is the most important factor ; indeed soaring 
may be defined as flying without loss of, or with increase 
in height. No one is a soarer until he can maintain himself 
continuously at an elevation greater than that of his starting 
place and land somewhere at least as high as that starting 
place if the conformation of the land permits. Consequent- 
ly it is no longer necessary, as in gliding, to keep our eyes 
fixed on or searching for the landing field far below us. Our 
whole attention can now be devoted to floating and climbing." 
" Why do you make so many turns on such a short 
length of slope ? " asks one.
" A short slope compels you to do so. 
The soarer 
must be careful always to remain within the reach of a 
favourable upwind ; 
hence the many turns and the 
continuous flight in an * S ' -shaped course. The correct 
turn is the Alpha and Omega of successful soaring."
178

--- PAGE 234 ---
THE SOARING COURSE 
179
" Must we pull more in soaring than in gliding in order 
to keep ourselves aloft ? "
" Not necessarily. 
So far as the air is concerned, there 
is no difference between gliding and soaring. In both 
cases it is equally necessary to have good way on against 
the wind. Soaring is gliding in an upwindL We only 
notice the difference when we watch the flying from the 
ground. Imagine a small model of a glider gliding in a lift. 
As long as the lift remained motionless, the glider would 
sink towards its floor. 
But if the lift began to move up- 
wards at a speed greater than that at which your model was 
falling, the latter would give you the appearance of rising. 
That is what happens when you soar. You glide downwards 
in an air current which is rising more rapidly than you are 
losing height by gliding. And this shows us that we should 
keep the machine in precisely the same position as in 
gliding, the only difference being that you must be more 
careful to fly correctly if you are to maintain your position. 
In gliding it doesn't matter in the least whether you push a 
little more or less to gain speed, and the same holds good 
for soaring, that is to say when the upwind is strong enough. 
But as a rule the conditions are such that the wind is just 
strong enough for correct soaring. Then you must manage 
to let your plane ' fly itself/ which means that you must 
not err through overpushing. Obviously overpulling is 
also just as bad an offence as in any other form of flying.
" In gliding it is not advisable to make turns too close to 
the slope unless you handle your machine extraordinarily 
well. Therefore, as well as for reasons of safety, gliding 
practice is generally carried on at some distance away from 
the hillside. But for soaring the flyer must have learnt 
to master such difficulties ; the ability to control a machine 
easily and surely is a first condition of good soaring. 
All the mechanical movements of steering must be per- 
formed automatically, and indeed as long as the flyer is not 
exposed to any abnormal squalls, every action must be 
automatic because all our powers of observation are 
required for the upwind and for making our turns accurately 
at the proper points."
" Does the fuselage-plane which we use for soaring fly

--- PAGE 235 ---
i8o 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
very differently from the framework machine which we 
used for the * A ' and * B ' tests ? "
" All steering rules are, of course, exactly the same. 
But the fuselage-planes are much more sensitive, and as 
they need stronger wind for flying, they are speedier. 
When you are used to these differences, you will prefer 
to fly in such planes, but people generally find it rather 
hard at first to accustom themselves to the new type of 
machine. You will soon realize that when we all practise 
with the ' Priifling.' "
We set to work once more on the gentle slope. But 
this time our progress is quicker, for the material with 
which we have to deal has already been sifted, and all 
the pupils now here have shown flying talent. At first 
the sensitive machines are often over-steered, but soon 
everyone grows used to them.
One of the pupils pushes the machine too much. When 
asked why, he answers : "I am always afraid that I am 
over-pulling because the plane flies so ea