sily, and I can 
only hear it whistling when I push/ 1
" That is a mistake which is often made when you start to 
fly fuselage-planes, because they offer less resistance to the 
air and have no wires in which the wind can hum. All the 
sounds connected with such planes are softer, so that it is 
necessary to listen more attentively ; this applies also to 
the feel of the wind on your face."
These difficulties in flying the new kind of plane are 
soon overcome. 
The real training for the " C " test, 
the Soaring Pilot Test, consists in the continuous flying of 
good " S " curves. 
For the " B " test two turns were 
required, but now the candidate must describe two complete 
turns upon a much shorter course or turn backwards 
and forwards more often upon a course of similar length 
as the former one. The main object of the flyer is to 
remain as long as possible upon a slope where the upwind is 
strongest. But the pupils soon find out that this depends 
more or less upon the wind ; it is far easier to fly turns 
within a narrow radius against a strong wind than it is on 
calm days. The stronger the wind, the more our turns 
will be compressed and elongated ; in such a way figures

--- PAGE 236 ---
THE SOARING COURSE 
181
of eight can be flown when the wind is sufficiently strong.
We soon begin to discover the capabilities of individuals, 
generally by watching how the different pupils succeed in 
flying along the edge of the slope and observing whether 
they can make good turns in places chosen for them before- 
hand. When soaring above a short slope, much of the 
available time and space must be occupied by changes of 
direction ; therefore at this stage of the training we devote 
special attention to the correct management of turns. 
Many a one who can easily keep his plane in the correct 
position when flying a straight course, begins to push too 
much as soon as he enters a turn.
So the work goes on day by day. Luckily the weather is 
sometimes quite calm, while at others a strong, gusty wind 
blows. It is good, too, for the pupils to obtain experience 
on slopes running in various directions.
Whenever possible, it is advisable to practise turns above 
a slope that can be used later to fly the " C " test. In 
every stretch of country there will be several such hill- 
sides, and it is our first task to familiarize ourselves with all 
of them. It is important that all turns should be made 
precisely at the turning points. By this time the turn itself 
will not cause the pupils any great difficulties, but it is 
essential that they should feel as sure of themselves when 
turning as in a straight flight, and contrive to extract the 
utmost from their machines during their turns.
Some of them soon make their turns really well. Then 
they begin to pay special attention to the weather, and at 
last there comes one day a really good soaring wind.
One of the candidates makes a start. He climbs high 
at once and we can see how well he controls his machine in 
a straight flight ; his turns, too, are correct. And yet, 
in the course of his flight, he drifts slowly but continually 
away from the hillside without seeming to notice it. The 
farther he drifts from the slope, the weaker is the upwind, 
until at last his machine begins to sink, so that he cannot 
attain flight of five minutes' duration above starting point 
that the test requires. We watch how he endeavours to 
save the situation by sharp pulling, but in vain ! 
The plane 
drops and drops !

--- PAGE 237 ---
i8a 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
The poor pilot returns with a sad face. " The upwind 
grew lighter; it was impossible to stay up any longer I " 
he vows.
" It was not the upwind's fault, but your own. To 
soar properly you must be able to maintain yourself above 
the upper edge of the slope. Parallel with that and a little 
outside the real fall of the slope, there is a streak of the 
strongest upwind, and you must try to keep within reach 
of it. The figure of eights that we fly are nothing but 
elongated, compressed ' S ' curves within the field of 
action of this upwind."
" But what must I do when I can't manage to turn 
sufficiently to get back to the hill ? " asks the pupil.
" In that case you must try to hug the slope more closely 
than usual before you enter the turn. It doesn't matter in 
the least if you get a little out of the strong upwind field 
provided that you are flying in the direction of the slope, 
for in that case you will find yourself directly in the strong 
rising air current as soon as you turn against the wind. 
The advantage of this is that your flying speed is slowest 
when you are flying against the wind, and so you can 
maintain your position for a longer time in the strong 
upward current. So always remember to hug the slope 
before beginning a turn ! "
The next candidate does well on the whole, but we see 
that he continually makes faulty turns. At one time he 
pulls too much and slips till he nearly touches the slope, 
at another he pushes too much so that the plane cants 
inward too slightly and cannot get round properly.
" What must I do," he asks, " to keep the machine in the 
right position in a turn ? "
" It will help you to study and use all the flight conditions 
in the same way that you did in straight flying. Instead of 
a fixed point take the whole horizon line and be sure that 
it glides along before your eyes quite smoothly and regularly. 
Generally it is easier to get round if you pull very gently 
when you are in the turn, because the rise slows you down 
a bit, and the wind then carries you again towards the slope. 
But, above all, do not think of turning as something out of 
the extraordinary. Fly calmly along the slope, get a little

--- PAGE 238 ---
THE ORDINARY CURVE NECESSARY FOR THE "B" TEST MAY BE CHANGED BY THE INFLU- 
ENCE OF THE WIND INTO A CORRECT " S " CURVE SUCH AS SOARERS USE WHEN TACKING
ABOVE A SLOPE. 
(HILLSIDE)
CAUSED sv wws/o
Facing page_I8'2

--- PAGE 239 ---
49. NORMAL SOARING FLIGHT ON SLOPE (" C" TEST)
PLANE TACKS A HOVE THE STEEPEST SLOPE
, Page 1S3

--- PAGE 240 ---
THE SOARING COURSE 
183
nearer to it before beginning your turn, then steer with 
ailerons and rudder in the same direction, fly steadily 
onward, and wait patiently till the machine carries you 
round ! "
The wind has changed ; we move to another slope, and 
once more I demonstrate. When I land, a pupil asks: 
" Why do you sometimes begin your turn at a certain spot, 
while at others you start it much sooner, almost in the 
middle of the slope ? "
" You must all have noticed that a good machine has a 
tendency to luff, that is, to turn of itself towards strong 
gusts of wind. When you are flying on a slope, you 
continually feel the gusts that play about it turning the plane 
into the wind and away from the slope as they rise. Now 
every gust brings with it a stronger upwind, and it would be 
foolish and useless to try to force the plane out of this 
upward current. The machine itself shows us quite 
plainly where the most favourable upwinds lie, though 
when the gusts are too weak we ignore such hints. But if 
the tendency to turn is very strong, then it is advisable to 
take advantage of the gusts and carry out the curve which 
has already been initiated by the luffing. And this is the 
way to maintain ourselves the longest possible time in 
a strong up wind."
Once more the word of command rings out. " Pull 
out! . . . Run ! . . . Let go ! " But this time something 
goes wrong at the very beginning. As soon as the plane 
reaches the upwind field and begins to climb, we see that 
the pilot is nervous. He presses very suddenly. The 
upward current lifts him again ; then comes an upward 
gust which could enable him to climb, but he pushes once 
more, and is soon compelled to land.
" I was always afraid of over-pulling when I climbed/' 
says the pupil later.
" It is most important that you should learn to discrimin- 
ate between the short climbs when we pull and those which 
are necessary for soaring. Climbing by pulling is impossible 
unless some outside force helps the machine to rise. We 
only climb as long as the machine is under way, but it 
soon comes to a standstill. Only in motor-flying where

--- PAGE 241 ---
184 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
a powerful engine supplies continuous force, can we climb 
by pulling the machine high. The correct climb in soaring 
is that by which the plane rises parallel to itself. The 
longitudinal axis of the machine lies always in the position 
for normal flying ; i.e., horizontally ; moreover, when we 
are climbing the horizon will always lie at the same height 
before us. When this is the case we may rise in the upwind 
by spurts of from twenty to thirty yards or more at once 
without danger of over-pulling. But sometimes in very 
violent squalls the machine gains great speed, in which case 
we may pull a bit and so transform the kinetic force into 
height."
At last there comes a candidate whose work is perfect. 
He starts, makes good use of his starting impetus and flies 
correctly. We see how the plane begins to climb at once, 
how the turns are carried out, calmly and methodically, 
in the right places. As in all exhibitions of good soaring, 
we gain the impression that this flight might go on for ever. 
And the plane rises steadily all the time. By the movements 
of the steering surfaces we see how gusty it must be 
immediately above the slope. That is, of course, only 
natural, for every inequality of the ground throws up gusts. 
The higher the plane climbs, the steadier it becomes 
until at last it reaches the perfectly still stratum of air 
in which it can float onward quite easily. We see plainly 
that this pilot possesses fine flying or air sense. 
He keeps 
his machine constantly in the best upwinds ; directly after 
starting he was somewhat in front of the slope, but when he 
had climbed enough he flew over its upper edge and now, 
having risen very high, he follows the course of the upwind, 
and the higher he climbs, the farther he returns behind 
the slope.
So he easily flies his five minutes and passes his Soaring 
Pilot's Examination. His comrades below shout up to him 
delightedly, and he waves back to them from above. He has 
understood, but he still continues to soar until, with a 
flying time of from ten to fifteen minutes his " C " test has 
become a brilliant affair.
But landing causes him some difficulty ; never before 
had he landed high up at the starting place. He has to

--- PAGE 242 ---
THE SOARING COURSE 
185
make several attempts, and once he narrowly escapes 
getting into the downwind. But at last he succeeds, and the 
first " C " test of this course has been flown.
" That was a wonderful flight," said the young pilot 
later. " But I had to rack my brains to find out how to 
land. I had entirely miscalculated the speed of the 
machine/*
" That happens very often," says the teacher. " But you 
can easily avoid such mistakes once you have fixed clearly 
in your mind the proportionate velocities of a plane when 
flying with and against the wind. The best soaring wind 
is that in which the plane comes almost to a standstill if 
lightly pulled against it. With our ' Priifling,' this occurs 
when the wind is blowing at a speed of thirty miles an hour. 
When we are flying into the wind, from the point of view 
of a man on the ground we have little or no flying speed. 
If we must turn in order to prepare to land, our speed 
increases in a moment to sixty miles an hour, that is to say, 
the machine's velocity is multiplied by that of the wind. 
If you do not then turn back into the wind at the right 
moment, you are likely to over-run a fixed landing place 
badly. It is therefore best never to turn directly out of the 
wind if you want to circle round to reach your landing 
place ; bank the machine a bit and let the wind drive 
you sideways, so that by tacking into it more or less 
vigorously you may manoeuvre your way slowly to the 
landing-place. But a good soarer ought to be able to land 
with the wind behind him without being inconvenienced 
by its velocity. In such cases, however, he must take great 
care to fly exactly in its direction, otherwise there is a risk 
that its velocity may tear the skid off the plane when it 
touches the ground."
By this time the breeze has dropped considerably, and 
we have a good opportunity to practise landing with the 
wind.
" Start, gain a little height on the slope, and then 
turn out of the wind, taking care not to drop below 
the edge, because you are still so inexperienced that any 
attempt to land uphill, as expert flyers do, would be very 
dangerous for you. You must still land high up on the

--- PAGE 243 ---
186 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
summit or even on almost level ground. You land as 
usual, but be sure that you push the stick the moment the 
plane comes to rest after landing, otherwise the wind may 
easily turn it over."
The first part of this programme is carried out perfectly, 
and everything goes well until the actual landing takes place. 
The pilot catches up the machine slightly, and now it touches 
the ground. But we can all see that the flyer is no longer 
following the instructions which have just been given. 
Probably he undervalued their importance, at any rate the 
plane's elevator remains after landing in the same position 
that he placed it when catching up the machine before 
landing.
" Now we shall see it turn turtle/' says the teacher.
And he is right ! 
The wind has pushed its way in under 
the elevator, and the tail rises gradually. Now the pupil 
pushes, but too late ! 
The wind turns the machine over 
on to its back.
The " Wrecker " crawls up to us dejectedly.
" The rudder is bent, and several ribs are injured/' 
he announces in sad tones.
" The best thing for you to do is to mend the machine 
yourself in the workshop/' says the instructor. " One thing 
we must all impress upon our minds again and again, so that 
we are sure not to forget it in moments of emergency, and 
that is : after landing with the wind, push the stick over 
sharply. The best thing is to do it while the machine is 
still sliding along the ground."
As soon as the first Soaring Flight Test has been passed, 
a spell is broken. The following days bring favourable 
winds, and a long series of excellent flights. One after the 
other passes his test. And a most pleasant ending to the 
course is time and weather permitting to let each pupil 
fly for an hour.
There is not one of them who does not climb out of the 
machine laughing with joy after such a flight. 
Soaring is 
the reward for the trouble of learning to glide. There is 
only one thing which surpasses it competitive flying with 
high-grade machines.

--- PAGE 244 ---
TURNING CURVE IN A STRONG WIND
OUTWARD BOUND
HOMEWARD SOUND
AXIS OF
PLANE. INCUN&D 
SLOPE.
6O°
AXIS OF= 
INCUNED TCAVAS2CS
50.
Facing page 186

--- PAGE 245 ---
TURNING CURVE IN A CALM
AXIS OF PLANE
TO SLOPE
iX)NeiTUDlNAL AXIS OF
PA3RALIBL TO SLOPE
R
51.
Facing page 187

--- PAGE 246 ---
HIGH PERFORMANCE FLIGHTS
T
HE flights made by Lilienthal and the brothers 
Wright were remarkable achievements. 
Measured 
by standards of skill, they were as remarkable as 
those performed by the best of the modern flyers, perhaps 
even more so.
If we are to judge merit by a comparison between the 
achievements of persons we call great and those of their 
contemporaries, the results obtained by those men were as 
outstanding, relatively speaking, as any of the record flights 
of to-day. Modern achievements are greater only in their 
standards of values, though these are naturally the standards 
by which the average man judges them.
Nevertheless there is one important difference between 
those early days and to-day. Eliminating the question of 
technique for the moment and considering only the actual 
flights, we may say that those pioneers owed the distinction 
they won solely to the sensitive, skilled hands with which 
they manipulated their machines. The modern flyer has 
to use his head as well as his hands.
As far as pure flying is concerned, I may venture to say 
that Martens possessed the standard of efficiency we demand 
from a modern expert pilot when he struggled through his 
first flight of an hour's duration in 1922. The only factor 
that makes modern flying more difficult is the increase in 
the dimensions of the machines. What we mainly require 
from the modern super-plane is a good gliding angle which 
will enable us to glide the greatest possible distance from 
an elevation, combined with a low sinking speed, so that we 
can remain aloft in limited aerial fields, even when the 
upward movements of the air are only slight. Finally, we 
demand a great range of speed in order that we can fly 
slowly without stalling and quickly without creating a bad 
gliding angle.
187

--- PAGE 247 ---
i88 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
But these excellent qualities, which can be developed to 
a much higher degree in gliders and soarers than in power- 
driven planes, are dearly bought, as we can see at once 
if we watch a good flyer using one of our super-planes for 
the first time. With an expert crew at the rope the start 
presents no difficulty, and a straight flight seems easy enough. 
But the otherwise obedient bird appears to boggle at 
rounding a corner ; it is difficult to put her properly into 
a turn and not exactly easy to get her out of it again. There 
are also difficulties in landing ; the machine glides on long 
after the flyer feels that he ought to have reached the 
ground. On a small landing-place it is really difficult to 
get down at all, and the slightest inattention will cause 
one wing to graze the ground, with the result that the plane 
swings round violently.
We see that the qualities which are so good in some ways 
give us difficult problems to solve in other directions. 
Large machines are naturally heavier than small ones, 
though when they are in the air this greater weight will be 
offset by the larger bearing surfaces. 
The starting opera- 
tions also need greater exertions and more concentrated 
attention. The simple rubber rope no longer suffices ; 
two or even three such ropes are needed. Six to ten men 
pull on each side, while five or six sturdy young fellows 
must be able to provide the necessary resistance by hanging 
on to the tail. 
Usually they seat themselves on the ground, 
with their feet firmly planted in holes that have been dug 
beforehand. Successful experiments have also been made 
with posts to which the machine can be attached ; in such 
cases the pilot releases the connection at the last moment 
by an automatic device.
The pilot's greatest problem is that of deriving the 
greatest benefit from the energies created by the starting 
rope. The sharp jolt given by this method of starting 
requires him to press himself firmly against the back of 
his seat. A common mistake is to climb too rapidly at the 
moment of starting. In such cases the rope has to be flung 
off too abruptly, and the man who will make the best use 
of the power germinated by his start should push his stick 
slightly as the rope is released and fly away only a little

--- PAGE 248 ---
HIGH PERFORMANCE FLIGHTS 
189
distance above the heads of his starting crew. The rope 
thus remains in contact with the machine until the last 
moment and gives it the benefit of all its impetus. By 
pulling the stick, the speed obtained in this fashion can be 
transmuted into height, but care must be taken to push 
it back again the moment normal flying speed is obtained 
in order to eliminate the danger of stalling.
There is an absence of noise about the types of machines 
that are aerodynamically perfect. Even in swift flights 
hardly any increase of sound is noticeable, while the 
decrease occasioned by a stall is not very great. Much 
practice is needed to accustom the pilot to this peculiarity. 
Moreover, in these machines his seat is placed in front 
of the wings, so that he cannot as easily observe his position 
in space as in a school glider.
Typical of the large-winged machines, with their enor- 
mous span, is their lack of reaction to the aileron. Steering 
by manipulation of the ailerons is a slower business than it is 
with machines of lesser span. In straight flights this is not so 
noticeable, because although the mighty wings sometimes 
seem to resist the pilot's manipulations, they are, on the other 
hand, hardly affected by gusts that try to capsize them ; their 
stability is therefore excellent. But if the pilot goes into 
a steeply banked turn by vigorous manipulation of ailerons 
and rudder, the machine will seem bent on staying in it. 
Consequently he should apply the opposite motions some 
moments before the turn is completed if he is to come out 
of it satisfactorily.
The flyer who desires to perform great soaring feats 
must be miserly about every inch of height and learn 
to take full advantage of even the slightest sources of 
power. 
In other words, we must fly as economically as we 
can.
We must endeavour to move our steering surfaces as 
slightly as is compatible because large surfaces that 
project into the air create resistance and consume energy. 
As such extreme manipulations of the steering gear are 
absolutely essential for steeply banked turns, the latter 
should be avoided whenever possible, and if you watch 
expert soarers in machines of large span, you will be

--- PAGE 249 ---
190 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
astonished to see how low are the angles of their 
turns.
There is another explanation for this. The changes of 
direction needed on a slope are not really so great as they 
may appear, while the position of the plane with regard 
to the direction of the wind and slope is determined by the 
parallelogram of speed produced by the combination of 
its own speed with that of the wind, plus the direction of 
the goal.
If you desire to steer a boat across a rapid stream, you 
do not make directly for your objective ; the stronger the 
current, the more sharply you have to keep your boat's nose 
against it. The same applies to the soaring machine, the 
longitudinal axis of which lies always at more or less of an 
angle to the direction of its course against the wind. If 
you want to take a boat across a stream and back again, you 
do not turn it completely round when you start your return 
journey, but merely put it at the same angle to the current 
as you found necessary on the outward trip, but, of course, 
in the opposite direction. When, therefore, we want to fly to 
a point opposite one we have reached, we do not need to 
put the machine into a complete rightabout turn. It will 
suffice to change our direction to a degree that diminishes 
in proportion as the velocity of the wind increases. To 
effect this reverse of direction, therefore, only slight motions 
of the steering gear are needed to put the machine into a 
slight turn. And thus it sometimes happens that a pilot 
who is flying quite correctly gives the impression that he is 
putting his machine into the tabooed skidding turn.
He who drives quickly has difficulty in pulling up. 
This is true on the ground, and just as true in the air. 
He who glides well finds difficulty in landing. 
He arrives 
somewhere after a wonderful exploit, having perhaps 
broken a world record and is happy to be coming down 
again. From afar he had chosen for his landing a clearing 
in a wood or a field between two groups of houses. He 
clears his last obstacle at a low height and arrives over the 
landing place. But it draws no nearer to him ; he pushes 
the stick but only gains speed and still remains too high up. 
Now he tries a side-slip, but it does not bring him very far

--- PAGE 250 ---
HIGH PERFORMANCE FLIGHTS 
191
down, and the obstructions on the other side of the landing 
place loom unpleasantly nearer until suddenly he is right 
up against them. He realizes that he has miscalculated, 
makes one despairing turn and may indeed thank his stars 
if it succeeds in obviating the necessity for someone to 
pick up the fragments of his machine and carry them home 
in a handkerchief.
In soaring flights the question " How shall I get down ? " 
is often more difficult to answer than " How shall I 
get up ? "
And yet in principle the means that help us are the same, 
although we put them to opposite uses. An upward current 
helps us to climb : a downward one will help us to land, if 
we can use it properly. If we make a flat turn to gain 
height, a comparatively steep one will help us to lose it. 
If we can rise by means of steady flight with the least 
possible steering movement, we can drop by sharp and 
alternating manipulations of ailerons and rudder.
It is essential to approach a small landing place sideways, 
with the machine banked, so that you can insinuate yourself 
into the limited space by means of a series of " S "-curves, 
which will be helped by the other factors we have already 
discussed.
One other matter calls for the greatest care in landing. 
We must avoid touching the ground or anything that 
projects from it with a tip of the great wing that is poised 
so close above it. When landing on level ground, such as 
a meadow or a stubble field, it will suffice to put the wings 
in a perfectly horizontal position. Then, when the machine 
is nearly at a standstill, they will gradually subside to the 
ground on one side.
Landings in hilly country and on steep slopes are more 
difficult. In both these cases it is necessary to abandon 
the horizontal position. We must often lift one wing- 
tip over a hillock, stone or bush, taking great care at the 
same time that the other tip, which naturally must sink, 
does not touch the ground. Moreover, the horizontal 
position is unsuitable for a steep hillside landing because it 
is almost certain to lead to a catching of the wing on the 
side which is towards the hill. 
At the last moment the

--- PAGE 251 ---
192 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
ailerons must be employed to give the wings an angle that 
will enable them to lie parallel to the slope.
The veto upon downhill landings which is so frequently 
stressed in the period of early training gains importance as 
the gliding angles improve. With high efficiency planes it 
is impossible to land when flying downhill, but their use 
frequently involves uphill landings with the wind behind 
the machine if the pilot is to land at a high starting place 
after a flight that has been cut short by loss of wind. 
In such cases you sometimes dash towards the slope at 
sixty miles an hour, and the steeper it is the more sharply 
you must push before reaching it. It looks as if you are 
trying to ram it, and you must therefore keep all your 
self-preservation instincts under the severest control until 
the last moment. Only when the onlooker imagines he 
can already hear the crash may you pull sharply on your 
elevator, so that your line of flight assumes the same angle 
as that of the slope. 
By means of the gentlest pushing and 
pulling you accommodate yourself to the gradient of the slope 
and land well under the most difficult circumstances.
Although such landings are generally brought off well, 
the pilot needs very practical powers of self control. Often 
two landing possibilities present themselves, one of which 
is safe, on level ground, straight into the wind, but at a 
spot where no one will see it, while the other is uphill, 
daring and right in the midst of a cheering crowd. The 
conscientious pilot will always choose the safe landing, 
unless some very important factor drives him to decide 
against it.
All this is part of flying knowledge and skill. The pilot 
who acquires the feeling that he can handle his machine 
well and make his turns in the correct places and is also 
confident that he can land safely, will certainly soon feel a 
desire to put his knowledge and skill to some practical 
test. In soaring the simplest way to do this is to make an 
endurance flight.
For such a flight a good machine, capable of holding its 
own in a region of upward currents, is important ; the other 
two factors are a steady wind and a steady pilot! The better 
and steadier the conditions are, the easier is the task for

--- PAGE 252 ---
HIGH PERFORMANCE FLIGHTS 
193
both plane and pilot. In a strong and steady wind, good 
flights of great length have even been made with school 
machines. The qualities required for endurance flights 
are purely sporting ones.
All over the world there are regions (especially in the 
neighbourhood of coasts) where regular and steady winds, 
little troubled by gusts, blow from morning till night. 
These are the best flying districts. In places where the 
meteorological conditions are not so favourable, it is 
advisable to consult a weather chart, which will tell you with 
a fair degree of certainty if you can find the needful strength 
and steadiness of direction in the winds of a given district.
The simpler the slope, the more extensive and the easier 
it is to survey as a whole, the better is it for your purpose. 
When a short slope necessitates constant turns, the pilot 
tires more quickly than over a long one where he can float 
along tranquilly for miles.
Equally important is a wide wind area which does not 
force us to make the radius of our curves all too narrow. 
Moreover, the quality of the landing ground spread out 
beneath us may be of greater importance for the success 
of our flight than might at first be imagined.
If it is possible to land at any moment, it is also possible 
to remain above the slope till the last moment, even though 
the wind should drop. Even when you have descended 
to within a few feet of the ground, it is often possible to 
work yourself up again if the wind freshens slightly. 
But if the opportunities for landing are bad say a small, 
distant field then you dare not wait for the last moment. 
You must leave the slope in time and pick out your landing 
place.
When in the air it is advisable to gain an accurate 
impression of the formations of adjacent mountain groups 
or ranges, as well as to ascertain where you may expect 
to find the strongest upward currents. Then you can take 
advantage of such spots by heading for them if the wind 
drops. Smoke from a fire on the ground will show us the 
wind's direction, which, however, is only of great import- 
ance when it changes. It is often customary to trace figures 
on the sand or display them on boards to tell the pilot the

--- PAGE 253 ---
194 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
wind's velocity and let him know whether it is likely to 
drop or freshen.
If you contemplate prolonging a flight into the night, 
it is essential to take careful note of the turning points 
beforehand. Then they need not be marked by glaring lights.
During the early part of such a flight we must try to fly 
with the least possible expenditure of energy. In an area 
where the upwind is good, it does not matter if the plane 
hangs a little or is pushed somewhat too much. The more 
the machine flies of itself, the less energy do we require to 
use, and so we may save up our strength for a falling wind, 
when it becomes of the utmost importance to extract all 
we can out of the plane.
If we choose our slope carefully and hit upon one that 
offers a few difficulties, the pilot will not be called on for 
great mental efforts. 
Success in endurance flying depends 
largely upon skill and staying power.
Systematic training of the will and bodily strength is 
of primary importance. Every pilot has his own way of 
getting the last ounce out of himself, which is well for him 
because it is extremely difficult to force the mind to con- 
centrate on the details of a safe landing after a long flight, 
and still more difficult to overcome the dead point in 
one's own energy. 
One man may help himself by 
muttering words of encouragement, another goes into a 
dangerously banked turn to waken himself up, while a 
third shouts the latest popular song at the top of his 
voice. But these are the personal secrets of our pilots ! 
No general rule can be given here !
We cannot ever dispense with endurance flights, as they 
are the basis of all skilled flying, but we must not forget 
that they are only a basis. When the flyer has advanced 
beyond this stage, he will desire to try long-distance flights.
The very best practice for this is to fly to a distant goal 
and return to the starting place. Now for the first time 
we fly boldly out into space, leaving our familiar slopes far 
behind. Before starting we must consider carefully the 
directions of the currents, and it is essential to gain height as 
early as possible because we are bound to reach a gap 
between the hills where there is no upwind. 
By pushing

--- PAGE 254 ---
LANDING, UPHILL WITH THE WIND BEHIND !
52.
a. KROMFHLD
Facing page 1

--- PAGE 255 ---
PLANE ON A SLOPE IN A FRESH BREEZE
WIND VELOCITY HIGH IX COMPARISON WITH MACHINE VELOCITY.
PLANK AT A SHARP ANGLE TO SLOPE. THEREFORE VELOCITY
PARALLEL TO SLOPE IS LOW
5:3.
Facing page 19."

--- PAGE 256 ---
HIGH PERFORMANCE FLIGHTS 
195
lightly we must try to cross it as quickly as we can. With 
our objective clearly in mind, we must at once seek out 
the slope of the new hillside that lies at a right angle to the 
direction of the wind, because we have lost height by our 
glide and must work ourselves aloft again by the help of 
upward currents. At this stage it is best to go slowly and 
to tack backwards and forwards over the slope till we have 
regained the necessary height. When the wind is irregular, 
this may take quite a long time, but if you can catch it at 
the right moment (when there is a strong gust, for instance) 
it is easy to attain the desired height. Everything depends 
upon a correct and speedy decision at such a moment, as 
hesitation will mean further loss of height; should this 
occur we must prepare to return as soon as we see that the 
altimeter is beginning to fall, and if we make correct cal- 
culations, we contrive to cross the gap where no upward 
current is to be expected at the moment when the wind is 
at its lowest. The advantage of this is that we head straight 
for the goal instead of being compelled to tack against the 
wind. The most favourable turn of events in such cases is 
a lull between two gusts for a period just long enough to 
enable us to cross the bad space. Then we can count upon 
finding on the further slope the currents that help to push 
us up again, even if we have dropped very low in crossing. 
This time it will suffice if we climb just high enough to be 
sure of landing at the original starting place.
Much can be learnt by such a simple flight along hill- 
sides, and later we must try to extend our flights. It is 
by no means easy to make sure of crossing the gaps between 
slopes or areas of downwinds, but on such occasions it 
is often useful to make preliminary tests by pushing out for 
short distances from the slopes where we are sure of a good 
upward current. The skilled flyer will soon learn to judge 
the possibilities of crossing the gap by the way in which the 
plane falls. If he finds his trial effort is attended by too 
great a loss of height he must turn back quickly, and must 
only make a new attempt when he has reached a higher 
starting point than his former one.
The pilot who reaches a really great height above the 
slopes on such flights will find a great difference in the

--- PAGE 257 ---
196 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
behaviour of the upward currents. He no longer drops 
into the gaps on the hillside ; he can fly far out behind or 
before the hill without losing height ; he no longer feels the 
small individual currents thrown up by every tree or fold 
of the ground. The region in which he finds himself is a 
broad, tranquil one which is less affected by the inequalities 
of the slopes than by the general formation of the range. 
Over the ridges which are points of junction for several 
valleys that are exposed to through-winds, the pilot will 
encounter vast columns of rising current, and these are 
the principal factors to be reckoned with when he is too 
high to distinguish the separate slopes and high enough 
to discern the general outline of the mountains.
Equally important is the influence of heat currents. 
A day on which the sun pours down hot rays into the valleys 
gives us a far stronger upwind than a cool day, and this 
upward rush of warm air will often help us to cross gaps 
that would be impossible to negotiate at other times. 
Such warm up-currents are generally to be found above 
houses, cornfields and rocks.
These factors may influence a pilot to make considerable 
revisions in his plans, and on hot days we cannot give our 
eyes' entire attention to the conformation of the slopes. 
We must take careful note of the patches of sunshine and 
shadow and keep a constant look-out for places that will be 
likely to be warmed by the sun's rays.
By the rules that govern soaring flights we must always 
choose a wind with a direction that is as perpendicular as 
possible to the general trend of the ridge when undertaking 
a long-distance flight. It is impossible and unnecessary 
to attain great heights, for the flight is in reality a series of 
hops from slope to slope. This is the ideal way of acquiring 
an ultra-sensitive air-sense which will enable us to take 
the utmost advantage of every light breath of air. It trains 
and sharpens our powers of observation, and improves 
our flying skill.
On principle precisely the same methods should be 
employed for flights over a fixed course on a hillside. As, 
however, flights along special courses can only be under- 
taken in one direction from a starting point, they are best

--- PAGE 258 ---
HIGH PERFORMANCE FLIGHTS 
197
accomplished with a partial stern wind. Thus the flying 
speed will be increased, and it will be easier to cross 
down-wind areas and valleys.
The correct choice of country is frequently the deciding 
factor in flights over long courses. 
Sometimes, when at a 
distance from a high hill, you can continue to soar in the 
upwind from some rising ground or the currents to be found 
at the edges of woods as well as those thrown up by houses, 
river valleys and railway embankments. 
By such means it 
is often possible to cross quite long gaps and prolong the 
course of the flight very considerably.
A thorough knowledge of the laws of currents is essential. 
We must know exactly where to expect eddies, accelerated 
currents or air-pockets. Up- and down-winds are no longer 
the only decisive factors for the success of a flight, and no 
one can face with indifference the prospects of flying across 
a ridge in order to gain another slope. The whirling 
currents that lie behind it will need careful consideration.

--- PAGE 259 ---
LONG DISTANCE SOARING
U
NTIL the recent discovery of the art of flying in 
clouds and thunderstorms long flights over a fixed 
course were rightly considered the highest develop- 
ment of soaring flight. They were combinations of the 
duration flight and the flight to a fixed goal and demanded 
a higher degree of skill than either of those other two forms 
of flight.
Up to that time fliers to a distant goal did not venture 
beyond the areas within their field of vision at the starting 
point. 
Before taking off they could survey the entire tract 
of country across which they were to fly, so that all their 
flights took place over more or less familiar ground. Also, 
in the case of the earlier long distance flights, which were 
comparatively short ones, it was at least possible to study 
the conformation of the mountain range through field 
glasses.
In the latter long distance flights (which are really long) 
this is not possible. They carry us into unknown country, 
to territory which we cannot see from our starting point ; 
consequently we encounter new conditions and experience 
many surprises. 
Before starting we must endeavour to 
accumulate all possible knowledge, both positive and 
negative, about the tract of country over which we intend 
to fly, and so our work in connection with such a flight 
begins long before it actually takes place.
In whatever country a prize may be offered for a new 
long distance flight, the first to gain by it are the sellers of 
maps and charts. Taking the starting point as his centre, 
each competitor must endeavour to obtain a clear mental 
picture of the whole stretch of land over which the flight 
is to be made. If no starting place is fixed by the rules of 
the competition, the flyer must consider carefully all areas 
of territory which offer prospects of an advantageous 
start.
198

--- PAGE 260 ---
PLANE ON A SLOPE IN A GENTLE BREEZE
TTIE PARALLELOGRAM OF VELOCITY GIVES THE POSITION OF THE PLANE AS IT GLIDES ALONG THE SLOPE
facing page

--- PAGE 261 ---
CLOUD SOAUIXC
CKOSSIM; TIM-: AKKA BKTWKKX HILL AND CLOUD ix TIM-: DIRKCTION OF Tin: CLOUD'S COUKSI:
CLOUD COURSE
1. 
RKGION 
OF 
STEADY 
UPWARD 
CURRENTS FROM A HILL
2. 
REGION OF WANDERING UPWARD 
CURRENTS 
B E L O W 
THE 
j>j .«j 
CLOUDS
R. KfJONFELO
109

--- PAGE 262 ---
LONG DISTANCE SOARING 
199
When various stretches of country are feasible, it is 
always best to choose the one from which the best general 
view can be obtained or the one which possesses the largest 
and most continuous range of hills or mountains and the 
longest ridge. It is important that the general line of the 
range shall lie at an angle of from ninety to forty-five 
degrees to the prevailing direction of the most frequent 
winds of the district in question. There should also be 
several good places for a forced landing in case of need, 
as without these a long distance flight is often impossible. 
If the land is sharply broken up or possesses no continuous 
mountain chains or ranges, it will be necessary to ascertain 
the localities where the difficult gaps can best be crossed. 
High soaring slopes give us the best chances to cross 
valleys and plains and carry on in spite of the down currents 
the latter cause if we can contrive to gain enough height 
on the former. The conformation of these slopes must be 
such as will enable us to fly with the wind partially behind 
us all the time. As in the case of flights to a distant goal, 
we need not worry about how we can return to the starting 
point, so that our entire efforts are concentrated on flying 
ahead in one direction. 
With the wind more or less 
behind us, our speed is increased, so that we can push 
on swiftly over difficult places and glide a longer distance 
from any height we may attain than we could in a 
side-wind.
The best way to practise planning out long distance 
flights is to endeavour to ascertain the most favourable 
lines of flight under varying wind conditions on a large- 
scale map that gives details of the mountain conformations. 
The flyer's eye soon learns to recognize the best courses 
and the various conditions that may be expected.
But that alone does not suffice. 
Only a very experienced 
pilot would be able to carry out a long distance flight 
correctly by a study of the map alone ; it is therefore 
advisable to to get know the whole course with your own 
eyes. This involves delightful journeys by motor cycle, 
motor-car, or on foot in the mountains, and innumerable 
observations. At various spots where special difficulties 
may be anticipated, you will do well to light a fire and to

--- PAGE 263 ---
200 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
enter on your map the information concerning air currents 
you will obtain by watching its smoke. From the way in 
which the smoke rises we can also judge the strength of 
currents in an upwind area and take accurate note of 
favourable localities.
Experiments 
with wind-tunnels are also helpful. 
If a wind-tunnel of the type to be found in an aero- 
dynamic research laboratory were available it would 
prove of inestimable value to anyone undertaking a 
difficult and dangerous flight, as for example one above 
precipitous rocky walls, by demonstrating the effects of 
currents under various conditions and circumstances. 
If such an instrument is unobtainable, a large ventilator 
will prove an efficient substitute. A rough model of the 
territory to be flown over is then constructed and exposed 
to its draughts. 
By means of a woollen thread fastened 
to a rod we can easily ascertain the directions taken by the 
current when agitated from various directions, while if we 
strew sawdust on the model and then turn on the current 
we can estimate, by noting where it remains undisturbed, 
the localities where we must expect to find regions of "dead 
air," i.e., where no currents will be found.
The observation of obstacles in the currents of rivers 
and mountain streams is also another good method of 
training oneself to learn the conditions and circumstances 
of air currents. It is essential that we should be able to 
use our knowledge of the laws governing the action of 
currents, and we must know precisely where we may expect 
eddies, accelerated currents and air pockets.
Upwinds and downwinds are no longer the only essentials 
for the success of a flight. We must study the plan of the 
course and note whether we have to fly over or round the 
ridges of its hills in order to pass from one slope to another. 
In the first case we fly over or perhaps even through a 
tract of air filled with eddies, which may jeopardize the 
whole flight, whereas in the second we fly in the stream of 
an accelerated current a far less dangerous proceeding. 
The more practice we gain and the finer our capacity for 
sensing currents becomes, the less preparatory work we 
shall need for our flights. A .pilot who has undertaken

--- PAGE 264 ---
LONG DISTANCE SOARING 
201
many long distance flights after careful preparations will 
gradually find his " current-sense " developing to such 
an extent that he can gauge the directions taken by the 
currents over the mountains and in the valleys that all 
form part of the restless ocean of air which covers the 
earth's surface. To attain such knowledge is the object 
of all preparatory studies, while the great advantage of 
these long distance flights is that they inculcate in practical 
fashion experience that may later prove of incalculable 
value to every flyer.
Such theoretical studies are a stimulating occupation 
which provides us with many fascinating problems. When 
you believe that you have mapped out an ideal long distance 
course, how aggravating it is to discover that you will 
eventually have to land on the roofs of a town, the tree-tops 
of a forest or the surface of a lake if you are to take full 
advantage of your height and gliding angle! The ideal 
course is one on which your flight is bound to be successful 
provided that wind and weather do not leave you in the 
lurch. A sound knowledge of meteorology is invaluable 
for long distance flights. We must know the weather 
conditions under which a wind from the right quarter may 
be expected, and when a very long flight is to be undertaken, 
a study of the laws governing weather conditions will 
enable us to make allowances for any change of wind that 
may take place during it. The time of day is another 
important factor in weather conditions, and in any flight 
of long duration such changes must be taken into con- 
sideration. A drop or change of the wind may compel 
a premature abandonment of a flight, or a gale, heavy rain, 
or fog may oblige us to land. All these factors require 
careful preliminary consideration.
Before he starts out on the " long trail/' the participator 
in a distance flight draws up his plan of campaign, in which 
he provides for all emergencies, likely or unlikely. The 
quality that stands him in best stead is versatility ; he must 
be prepared to cope with many various situations on many 
different slopes. He must bear all possibilities in mind, 
and know exactly what to do for the best if the wind changes 
sooner than he expects or the hillside on which he looked

--- PAGE 265 ---
202 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
for a particular kind of current should turn out to have a 
quite different one. In long distance flying the head 
must do more work than the hands.
But there are exceptions. They are to be found in those 
territories which are, geographically and meteorologically, 
specially favourable for soaring flight, and consist of coastal 
areas where unbroken dunes extend for miles. 
In such 
localities there is usually a regular wind often so 
regular that we know exactly when it will occur and in 
what strength. There are, also, mighty mountain ranges 
which present unbroken natural barriers and day after 
day produce a wind that blows in a constant direction. In 
such regions soaring is easy and opportunities for long 
distance flights are more frequent than elsewhere. When 
judging the respective values of flights, it is therefore 
essential to take into consideration the conditions under 
which they were carried out.
And now for the actual flight! The start and the earlier 
stages of every long distance flight are exactly the same 
as those of ordinary slope flights. The pilot soon begins 
to make all kinds of observations which may be useful to 
him later. We are aware that, according to temperature 
and weather conditions, the upward current is on one day 
more directly above the slope, while on another it rises 
before it ; we can hardly tell beforehand where it will be, 
but it is very easy to ascertain its locality in the course of 
a few turns over the whole area. While doing this, we 
can generally judge whether the upwind is bearing well, 
whether we ought to fly carefully, taking advantage of every 
inch of height, or whether the whole upwind area is favour- 
able enough to give us ample scope for liberty of action. 
Very important also is the frequency of the gusts, which 
varies considerably under different weather conditions. 
On 
such a first reconnoitring flight within our own familiar 
territory we can see at what intervals we may expect gusts 
or cessations of the wind, whether they recur regularly 
and what is the degree of their strength. While we are 
finding out all these things, we are rising steadily until we can 
climb no higher, and then comes the moment when we 
may finally decide which of our projected and carefully

--- PAGE 266 ---
LONG DISTANCE SOARING 
203
planned flights we will carry out. We must choose the 
plan which seems best suited to the day's conditions.
And now we will glide to the next hillside, and soon 
ascertain that there is a good use for all the knowledge 
we have acquired. 
Duration flights have taught us to 
wait for the favourable moment which we can use for 
hopping over a gap. Everyone has, at one time or another, 
watched the waves of a stream ; often one of them seems 
to remain poised at the same height for a long time, then 
suddenly it rises violently only to come crashing down the 
next moment. An accidental encounter between single 
eddies and impulses is the reason of this phenomenon, 
and a similar one takes place on slopes. The flyer's problem 
is to hit upon the precise moment when a special increase 
in the energy of the upwind occurs, and we may often have 
to wait long for such a moment. The tranquil patience 
we have learned in endurance flying is a good preparation 
for us in such cases.
Now we fly onward, continually losing height. We 
discover that the wind has dropped. We are over such a 
low slope that if it decreases further we shall be obliged 
to land. There is only one thing to do : turn back. 
So we now fly quickly back to the last favourable high 
slope, and in order to reach it we recall to our memory all 
the experiences of our long distance flights to a goal and 
back again. In these flights we have learnt what we ought 
to do in the present emergency, i.e., we must wait on our 
favourable slope till the wind gets up again. This often 
means a very long delay, for we dare not resume our journey 
until we are sure of a strong, steady wind.
The straight way is not always the shortest. This is a 
truth that soaring teaches us most emphatically, for the 
round-about way often plays a great part in long distance 
flying. 
Often a flyer deliberately chooses to go out of 
his direction if he finds a favourable upwind by which 
he can gain a considerable height. The extra height amply 
repays him for apparent loss of time.
The hillsides over which we fly do not seem strange to 
us nor do the weather conditions. 
We have worked 
their problems out beforehand and have now the pleasure

--- PAGE 267 ---
204 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
of seeing our surmises turn out correctly. Of course there 
are bound to be some incalculable elements which will test 
our powers of rapid action and thought ; much depends 
upon our capacity for drawing rapid conclusions in such 
emergencies, and often unexpected events or obstacles 
may compel us to change our route or adopt an entirely 
new one. There is continually something to observe, 
to consider, to decide.
From time to time our whole mind must be concentrated 
on the actual flying. 
Although we may have mastered 
our art so well that it no longer gives us any trouble under 
normal circumstances, yet when we find ourselves suddenly 
face to face with difficulties or serious problems we realize 
the necessity for concentrated attention. Perhaps we want 
to glance simultaneously at the speedometer, the map, the 
compass and the landscape because we have to make an 
instantaneous decision how to get our bird out of a slip 
into which she has been thrown by an unexpected squall, 
while at the same time we cudgel our brains to ascertain 
where this squall has come from, how it will behave and 
whether we can make any use of it.
In the meantime we are soaring steadily on from slope to 
slope. We find that when we have attained a sufficient 
height we can fly for long stretches with the wind 
partially behind us. But we find it difficult to make 
adequate use of upwind areas while we are speeding along 
so swiftly, and so, when we find that we have lost consider- 
able height, we turn slightly against the breeze and maintain 
ourselves as long as possible in such an upwind area 
in order to climb again.
By this time we are far away from our starting point 
and over unfamiliar ground. We take the utmost care to 
approach each new hillside from the right direction. 
" If I only knew where this breeze is coming from/ 1 
we think, and how often has every pilot that undertook a 
long distance flight given vent to similar thoughts. He 
noted the direction of the wind at the starting place, and by 
his compass he still recognizes the cardinal points ; if he 
had no compass, he could still identify them by the sun. 
But after several hours of flight over unknown country it is

--- PAGE 268 ---
LONG DISTANCE SOARING 
205
extremely difficult for him to know whether he can count 
on the wind remaining in the same direction. If he had 
water under him, a big pond or a broad stream, or, better 
still, a lake, it would be easy. 
By waves and spray he could 
at any rate see in which direction the wind is blowing down 
below. And an even greater help is smoke from a chimney, 
while the cloud of dust raised by a motor-car has often 
been of the greatest service to a flyer in a moment of despair. 
Other useful factors in determining the wind direction, 
although the signs are more difficult to read, are the weekly 
washing hung out to dry before a cottage and the motions of 
tree-tops or standing corn. Weathercocks on church 
towers or factory chimneys are less reliable, for often a man 
who has trusted one of them blindly realizes when he has 
been forced down to land that they have maliciously rusted 
themselves into immobility. Better agents for determining 
the direction of ground winds are the small smoke bombs 
which the pilot can drop out of his plane and the smoke 
landing signals that are employed for the guidance of 
aeroplane pilots of traffic routes. But the disadvantage of 
all these signs is that they only inform us how the wind is 
blowing close to the ground, and we frequently find that 
higher up, over the hillsides, it is behaving quite differently. 
When clouds are in the sky, the course of their shadows on 
the ground will tell us the direction of the wind in the cloud 
region, and if by careful observation of the ground pheno- 
mena we succeed in ascertaining the direction in which the 
wind is blowing low down, then we should be able, if we 
calculate our elevation correctly, to discover the course 
of the currents at our flying-height. Another method of 
ascertaining from which quarter the wind is blowing is 
as follows : take two turning-points and turn repeatedly 
above them, noting by means of a stop watch whether or 
not you need more time to fly in one direction than in the 
other. You can thus discover whether the wind is blowing 
from the direction of the one turning-point or the other, 
or whether it is blowing at right angles to both. Also, 
when flying over a familiar landmark, if you drop a 
piece of brightly-coloured cloth or paper, and then, 
making a short circuit, fly back over the same spot, a careful

--- PAGE 269 ---
206 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
observation of the course along which your sign has been 
blown will give you the exact direction of the wind.
All this is of far greater importance than may be imagined 
until one makes one's first long distance flight. Many 
fine feats have had to be broken off unfinished because a 
false computation of the wind's direction has led to the 
faulty negotiation of a hillside. The soarer is always 
dependent upon the wind ; he uses it, flies with it and fights 
against the difficulties which it creates for him. He must be 
intimate with the wind, must know its nature and attributes, 
and be able to make use of them. Therefore on every 
long distance flight, on every new hillside, our first inquiries 
must always be : from what quarter does the wind blow, 
how do its currents divide, what is its direction above and 
below me and at the height of my course ?
And as the element in which we move is an ever-changing 
and multiform one, we must accommodate ourselves to it, 
instead of clinging blindly to preconceived notions. We 
must be as changeable as the wind in our thoughts and 
decisions. Let this be our golden rule. The best planned 
flight must often submit to drastic alterations at less than a 
moment's notice. There are always three matters of grave 
importance which must be constantly in our minds  
the plan, the reserve plan and the possibility of a forced 
landing. Upon our ability to recognize instantly and 
clearly at a given moment the right thing to do depends 
the success of great flights. Failure to act correctly may 
mean a damaged machine or an injured pilot.
Just this point of the forced landing is frequently 
neglected. The man who has a clear conception of the 
possibilities of the development of force latent within both 
up and down winds, as well as of the astounding suddenness 
of their manifestations, realizes that he may at any moment 
be carried up to an amazing height in a few seconds. 
The opposite can also occur ; he may have been flying on 
the most beautiful upward current at a good height above 
the hillside, and then a few seconds later an unexpected 
downwind forces him to earth. This uncertainty alone 
should lead us to keep the possibility of having to make a 
sudden landing continually in the background of our minds.

--- PAGE 270 ---
LONG DISTANCE SOARING 
207
The habit of continually looking out for spots which would 
be suitable for landing becomes in time so thoroughly part 
of our subconsciousness that in the later days of our flying 
career we never need to give it a thought. Broad meadows 
and fields come into our field of vision and are noted and 
registered in the memory. 
If we need them they are there, 
ready to relieve us from the necessity of devoting too much 
thought to them.
Every landing made by a flyer on a long distance flight 
is a forced landing. The true sportsman never ends a 
soaring flight till he must ; his sole desire is to fly as far 
as he can.
And now let us imagine that we have exhausted all our 
resources. We remember from our study of the maps that 
in all this neighbourhood there is no slope which would 
enable us to fly farther that we can reach at our present 
gliding angle. 
Once more we concentrate upon the 
question of how to fly on as far as possible. Hitherto 
upward breezes have aided us, and perhaps they may help 
another competitor to fly as far. It is now a question of 
flying on and proving which is the better man. A few 
extra yards may mean a new record, and it is at moments 
such as these that old records are broken.
We know that we can make the most progress if the wind 
is behind us. But we must anxiously avoid every downward 
breeze. 
Below us lies a plain, intersected by a river, the 
course of which shows us the gradual fall of the land, and 
the thing we most desire to see the lowest point in the 
landscape. Every downward yard is of importance. We take 
for our objective the lowest point which lies approximately 
in the direction in which the wind is bearing us ; if the 
direction of the wind and the slope of the land are not the 
same, then our air-sense and experience must tell us which 
of the two lines of flight is likely to take us farthest. But, 
most important of all, we must note the landing possibilites 
in each direction.
We can cover the longest stretches when we do not need 
to pay any attention to the country beneath us, because we 
know that there are broad meadows to land on. Then 
we can let our bird float as far and as long as she will, and

--- PAGE 271 ---
208 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
when she can fly no longer she will settle down of her 
own accord, after we have succeeded in squeezing the last 
ounce of energy out of her. But it is a different matter 
when we are flying over a stretch of country which offers 
fewer good landing opportunities. Here is a splendid 
landing place perhaps, but the next one is two miles farther 
on. We try to make up our minds whether we are high 
enough up to fly over the tree tops of a neighbouring wood 
to the more distant field or whether it would be wiser to 
come down now. These are the most difficult moments for 
a pilot who is out for a record. The greatest and most 
successful exploit and the worst failure are often separated 
only by a hair's breadth. A man with three or four feet of 
height over his competitor may succeed in flying over a 
rocky ridge into the next valley, and beat a world record. 
The other man makes a mistake and smashes up his bird.
While we are floating in these final minutes and moments 
of a flight, two thoughts are always in our minds : 
A little 
farther, just a little farther ; but no accident! You are 
weary, you have a long and daring flight behind you ; 
even though you do not realize it, you are tired out. Every- 
thing depends upon the next few seconds ; pull yourself 
together, sharpen your wits. The fairest crown of such a 
proud flight is a smooth and faultless landing.
All such experience is useful to us in long distance flying. 
And there are other things, too a thousand little 
experiences that steady practice brings. A sharp observa- 
tion of details or a correct identification of some phenomenon 
we had never before seen from the air may often turn the 
scale. A wisp of smoke from a chimney, blowing along a 
hillside and then suddenly rising straight into the air 
shows us an updraught where normally none might be 
expected. A carefully planned flight has frequently been 
altered on account of smoke when it so happened that the 
housewives of the district were cooking their dinners at the 
time when the airman passed. It is well to time your 
flight so as to reach the most difficult country at an hour 
when you may expect the greatest number of smoking 
chimneys as wind-pointers, and it is therefore unwise to 
make long distance flights through industrial territory on

--- PAGE 272 ---
LONG DISTANCE SOARING 
209
Sundays. For precisely the opposite reasons we may count 
upon the help of the dust raised by touring cars in sparsely 
populated country at the week-end. On normal days we 
find the strongest current of warm air in the afternoon, 
when the sun's heat is strongest and the valleys are thorough- 
ly warmed. Therefore on such days it is advisable to time 
your flight so as to pass over doubtful spots during the after- 
noon. Birds of prey, which usually sail on a good upwind, 
are the best counsellors for long distance flyers, but their 
example must be followed with discretion, for their interests 
are not purely sporting ones. They may be seeking food, 
so that the struggle for existence keeps them a long time 
in neighbourhoods where the upward breezes are not 
particularly good.
How often have I heard men grumble at " those silly 
birds." But the birds are anything but silly, and I think 
that if we took as lively an interest in the hares in the 
thickets as they do, we should probably fly in their fashion.
And always and for all flights the motto is : 
" Never 
give up ! " Never own yourself beaten until there is 
absolutely nothing left for you to try ! 
Until the machine 
is at a standstill, the flight is not ended. Even if the skid 
is only an inch above the ground and already swishing 
through the grass, you are still flying ; there is always 
a possibility that a slope may take an unexpected turn, or 
a breath of air or an unexpected eddy may come to your aid. 
Then up you go once more, to fly onward for miles and 
miles. Never give up ! 
Clench your teeth and let every 
nerve in your body be on the look out for all possibilities. 
Show fight to the very end !
Such is long distance flying, and is it not the most 
wonderful of all sports ? 
It involves not only flying, 
but also thinking, choosing, deciding. We learn from it 
self control, we learn to master the forces of nature and 
our own weaknesses. Everyone who has flown a motor- 
less plane over a wide stretch of country, if even only once, 
will recognize the truth of what I say, and this is why those 
who have once begun can never give it up.

--- PAGE 273 ---
CLOUD SOARING AND THUNDERSTORM
SOARING
T
HE finest features of modern soaring flight are the 
constant new opportunities, struggles and diversions 
that it offers us. Not so long ago long distance 
flights were its main attraction, but in the year 1928 cloud 
flying became popular, and a year later we had grown so 
greatly daring that we harnessed the thunder to our use, 
and thunderstorm flying was added to the list of new 
sports.
Three forms of cloud flying are to be distinguished : 
Flying beneath the clouds, in them and above them. Not 
all clouds can be flown in, and it is the province of meteor- 
ology io explain precisely how such clouds are formed, the 
nature of their upwinds and the laws which govern them. 
For the pilot it suffices to know the appearance of a cloud 
in which it is possible to fly.
Beneath those beautiful great heaps of clouds, which are 
called fine weather clouds by country people and cumuli 
by meteorologists, we find upwinds. The larger they are, 
the more extensively and the higher they are piled up, 
the stronger is the rising current below them. The pilot 
has an intuitive feeling ihat the cloud is drawing him to it. 
We shall discuss the reason of this later.
We begin as usual by soaring along a hillside. The task 
which we have undertaken is to learn cloud soaring, the 
first stage of which is soaring under the clouds. For 
this our normal procedure is, as it were, inverted. We 
no longer look downward but upward to make our observa- 
tions and take our bearings. 
The skyscape with its cloud 
hills and valleys must rivet our attention even more than 
did the earthly landscape to which we have till now belonged. 
Formerly, when soaring for longer times on hillsides with 
beautiful clouds sailing above us, we probably noticed that 
the influence of these clouds extended to layers of air
210

--- PAGE 274 ---
CLOUD AND THUNDERSTORM SOARING 
211
lying far beneath them, and the phenomena we generally 
describe as gusts are found to be mainly due to the influence 
of a passing cloud. At the moment when such a cloud 
passes above us the area of upwinds suddenly increases and 
we climb high, only to drop again as soon as it has passed. 
But if we obtained in this way only a slight increase in 
height without coming under the direct influence of the 
clouds, the phenomenon would still be of use to us. It 
would always be an important aid to us when we have to 
cross gaps in slope soaring. Even if we could not quite 
get away from the upwind on a slope, our chances of reaching 
an opposite slope would be greatly increased if a cloud 
chanced to be standing directly over the intervening space 
or if, by the help of a cloud, we could gain the additional 
height that would enable us to push across the difficult spot.
But this is not what we mean by cloud soaring in the true 
sense of the word. Just as slope soaring is soaring by means 
of the upwind above a slope (which wind alone bears us up), 
so true cloud soaring must be soaring in the upwind under 
a cloud, without any dependence upon slopes. The slope 
would only be used as a kind of jumping-off ground to 
enable us to pass across to the cloud. The first and most 
difficult thing to learn is how to achieve contact with the 
clouds.
Hitherto we have had to deal with stationary upwind 
areas, that is to say, areas that are always to be found at the 
same locality on a mountain slope as long as the wind blows 
from a certain quarter. They are local, and may be described 
as fixed. The upwind area of the clouds is a wandering 
one ; like them, it drifts over the land. Our task is to 
cross from the fixed to the wandering. As we spring from 
the firm ground on to a moving tram, so must we spring 
from a slope to a passing cloud.
Looking at the business in hand from the point of view 
of the plane, we are concerned with two directions of move- 
ment that of our machine, which, generally, like the 
position of the slope, lies athwart the direction of the wind, 
and that of the clouds, which is identical with that of the 
wind.
Cloud soaring is still a very young sport, but already we

--- PAGE 275 ---
212 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
can distinguish between two different methods of obtaining 
contact. The original method was to cross from the 
slope to the cloud just as the latter was passing directly over 
the former. We call this " a hop across " in the direction 
of the cloud course, and our best preparation for it is to 
climb as high as possible while the cloud is still approaching. 
We soar up into the highest layer of air to which we can 
attain by means of slope flying, and as we cannot rise higher 
and do not sink deeper, we may describe such layers as 
" floating layers/' because we neither rise nor sink, but 
simply float. Then comes the cloud ; if we keep our 
plane more or less over the same position, we suddenly 
begin to feel jerking gusts of upward wind, which will lift 
us for a short time until we reach a boundary layer between 
the sphere of action of the slope and that of the cloud. 
Our problem is to slip from the one to the other, and this 
can often be done quite easily with vigorous movements. 
But often we find it necessary to make skilled use of one 
of the gusts by pulling ourselves into it as far as is feasible 
and then trying to climb with it. The altimeter shows us 
whether we have succeeded, for in that case it begins to 
mount steadily. We climb jerkily in sharp upward gusts, 
and at last we attain the realm of the clouds. From this 
moment we must change our manoeuvres, for it is not 
possible to tack in figures of eight as we do above the 
slopes.
The upward wind on a slope rises in the form of a more 
or less broad stream in front of and above the line of the 
hills or mountains. Cloud upwind, however, may be 
pictured as rising like a tube beneath the cloud. Its 
shape is determined by that of the base of the cloud, which 
is generally round, or nearly so. The best figure to describe 
is therefore a circle, and so we fly in vast rings under the 
clouds. Our movements resemble those of the birds, 
which sail upward in the same way but can make use of 
smaller upwind tubes because of their own smaller size. 
These smaller tubes are usually too insignificant to be used 
by our big machines.
There are considerable advantages in this method of 
getting into contact with a cloud by passing on with it from

--- PAGE 276 ---
CLOUD AND THUNDERSTORM SOARING 
213
the slope. 
By careful observation of our altimeter, we can 
ascertain beforehand the sphere of activity of the slope 
upwind, so that we know at once when we begin to feel the 
cloud upwind. 
At the moment in which the moving and 
the stationary upwinds are over the same spot their forces 
are united. From our base on the slope our progress to 
the cloud resembles the climbing of a ladder of wind on 
which we can mount easily, and the whole manoeuvre 
occupies only a comparatively short time. If for any 
reason the start is delayed until the last moment, this is 
the only right way to get into contact.
Nevertheless it is just this question of time which may 
prove a drawback. If anything should happen to prevent 
the contact, the situation of the pilot is a precarious one. 
He has tried to travel on with the clouds and has drifted 
far behind the slope, but now the spirits that bore him up 
suddenly forsake him. The cloud wind does not help 
him because it may be too high or too weak, and the slope 
upwind he has left far behind him. At times we are 
lucky enough to get back to the hillside by gliding against 
the wind, but if it is too strong we find that we are making 
no head against it ; we push in the endeavour to gain more 
way and find that this is useless ; we have reached a dead 
point. Then all at once we encounter a down wind, and 
a painful landing in the valley is the result.
In order to avoid these disagreeable possibilities a second 
method of gaining contact with the cloud upwind has been 
discovered. This is to fly towards it, and it is an excellent 
plan when the sun is emitting great heat so that we may 
expect large quantities of warm air to be rising over the 
plain and in valleys far away from the hillside. We work 
ourselves up high above the slope ; then we choose a 
large cloud which approaches us from a distance. We 
wander towards it, keeping a sharp eye upon the altimeter ; 
if it begins to fall, we turn back instantly and drop down to 
the hill. Like a snail that stretches out its feelers and 
retreats into its safe house as soon|as it^suspects any hostile 
element, so we grope cautiously in the unknown, noticing 
that the nearer the cloud draws to us, the farther we can 
fly towards it. Then comes a moment when, although

--- PAGE 277 ---
214 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
we have left the hill so far behind that no upwind could be 
normally expected, we suddenly begin to rise. We are in 
the cloud's upwind, and the game is ours. We begin to 
circle again, follow the cloud in the direction of our hillside, 
fly over it at a great height and so onwards across country.
The advantage of this flight towards the cloud is its 
safety. You can always get back to the hill. Even if 
you make a bad mistake and lose height because you leave 
the slope too soon, you are in the upwind field again as soon 
as you turn, for you have the safe hillside always behind 
you. You need only fly quickly back, assisted by the wind 
at your back and the good gliding angle that it always gives. 
Then you can work up once more and push out again. 
Should your efforts fail, you can always apply the original 
method at the last moment and cross to the cloud by flying 
with it in the direction of its course. A second advantage 
is that you can gain a better general view of the approaching 
clouds when flying towards them and can therefore select 
the largest of them at leisure before reaching them.
The danger of dropping down before the slope after a 
clumsy approach is very slight, although it does exist. 
But on the other hand we must take into consideration the 
fact that the repeated attempts which are often necessary 
before contact is obtained by this method take up much time 
 a factor which may frequently be of primary importance 
in competitive flying. The pilot must always decide for 
himself which of these two ways of getting into contact 
with his chosen cloud is best for each individual case.
Now comes the question of what to do when we have 
obtained our contact ; how do we fly with a cloud and how 
can we use it to the greater advantage in our flight ?
The most natural way of flying under a cloud is that 
which we have already described circling. But the cloud 
is sailing on over the land, and we with it. Our course as 
seen from the ground is a cycloid, a curve which would 
be described by a point on the circumference of a rolling 
wheel. 
In order to avoid losing our contact with the 
upwind field it is necessary to fly very close under the base 
of the cloud, to attach ourselves to it, so to speak. We 
need only drop down and fly a little lower when we require

--- PAGE 278 ---
12,000
9,000 
I
6,000
3,000
ATTEMPT TO SOAR WITH THE CLOUDS
CLOUD BASE TOO HIGH
COUBSE
REGION OF STEADY UPWARD CURRENTS FBQM A WLL 
REGION OF WANDERJN6 UPWARD QJW«NT5 BftOMTHE CLOUDS
OP WEAK UPWBMOS
IN A |>OWNV¥tNP
..„.;,..:..,., •••- 
: «?•".. .»»^;
56.
facing page 214

--- PAGE 279 ---
CLOUD SOARING
CROSSING THK AREA I'.KTWKKN IIII.L AND CLOUD IN THE DIRECTION OPPOSMI) TO THE CLOUD'S COURSE
CLOUD COURSE
1. REGION OF STEADY UP­ 
WARD CURRENTS FROM A 
HILL
2. REGION 
OF WANDERING 
UPWARD 
CURRENTS 
BE­ 
LOW CLOUDS
57.
Fa:in% pagt 215

--- PAGE 280 ---
CLOUD AND THUNDERSTORM SOARING 
215
a general view of the shape and size of our cloud and its 
neighbours. Directly beneath a cumulus the view is too 
limited ; we see only the grey curtain above us, with its 
billows and swirls. It is not possible to ascertain whether 
or not the cloud which bears us along is the largest and 
most favourable among the many racing across the firma­ 
ment. We may always expect the strongest upwind at the 
spot where the base of the clouds looks darkest as seen from 
below.
While flying onward we must accommodate ourselves to the 
prevailing shapes of the cloud masses. Often great rollers 
of cumuli, bunched together athwart the direction of the 
wind, drift over the land, jutting out like a hillside slope. 
As we are sailing with the help of both clouds and wind we 
are able, in such a case, to describe long loops and ellipses 
which enable us to turn as we please. We can fly farthest 
when we fly athwart the cloud when flying with it ; by this 
means we take advantage of the long drawn out cloud route, 
flying along it to its end and then moving on before the 
wind to the next roller, and so on.
But if the shapes of the single clouds are more or less 
globular, if they are sharply separated from each other and 
floating some distance apart, then it is advisable to cling to 
the base of one of them as long as we can. 
Seen from the 
earth, the flying velocity is not, in this case, greater than 
that of the cloud, which, according to the wind velocity, 
may be anything from ten to forty miles an hour. When we 
succeed in crossing with the wind from our first cloud to 
the next one, the velocity is increased by that .of the plane's 
so 