ir, which proves itself our bearing force, because it 
not only separates us from the abyss but supports us when 
we hover above it. He who soars on his broad pinions,

--- PAGE 55 ---
32 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
removed from contact with anything but air, propelled 
only by the breeze which, obeying the slightest pressure, 
lends itself to his will, soon loses all thought of danger in 
a wonderful feeling of security. . . . And such a soaring 
motion is a rich reward for all the trouble of attaining the 
necessary skill, for it is an indescribable pleasure to be 
rocked high in the air above the sunny hillsides, free from 
crowds, free from noise, lulled only by the soft music, like 
that of an Aeolian harp, which the breeze draws from the 
wires of the machine."
More than a thousand gliding flights had been carried 
out successfully when, on August igth, 1896, the catastrophe 
occurred in the lonely Rhinow Hills that snatched away 
this heroic pioneer of flying from his work. He wanted to 
test a motor plane which he had built himself. As the 
benzine motor was still too heavy, the machine was to be 
driven by compressed carbonic acid. No one knows 
exactly what happened. The single spectator, Lilienthal's 
old assistant, only saw the apparatus suddenly heel over 
in the air and crash to earth with its pilot. It is believed 
that some error in the new method of construction rather 
than any mistake on the part of the pilot was the cause of 
this tragic end.
The day after the fall Otto Lilienthal died from his serious 
injuries. His whole life had been lived in the spirit of his 
last words : " Sacrifices must be made."
In Lichterfelde, a suburb of Berlin, where the intrepid 
apostle of soaring made his first flight, in his own garden, 
a monument is erected to the memory of this heavenward 
striving man. Upon it are engraved Leonardo da Vinci's 
prophetic words :
" The great artificial bird will some day set out upon its 
first flight from the summit of a hill. It will fill the universe 
with amazement and all books with its fame. And the 
nest where the bird was born shall be glorious for ever."

--- PAGE 56 ---
SPEEDIER PROGRESS
I
N the history of flying we find that the deterrent effect 
produced by the sacrifice made by one man for the 
common good is only an apparent one. 
In reality the 
valiant, resolute spirit of humanity says : " Now less than 
ever will we yield." Consequently those who followed 
Lilienthal put all their strength and energy into the work 
they did.
Percy Pilcher, who may be rightly termed a direct follower 
of Lilienthal, was an engineer and a lecturer at Glasgow 
University. In 1895 he built a machine from his own 
designs, which show that he took pains to follow in Lilien- 
thal's steps. He had endeavoured to acquire a correct 
conception of the machines and methods of his great 
teacher from reports appearing in newspapers and journals 
that were often exaggerated and incorrect.
His first apparatus had a surface of one hundred and fifty 
square feet and weighed fifty-five pounds, but his experi- 
ments made little progress. At last, however, he set out 
for Germany and visited Lilienthal in his workshop. In 
the master's well-developed machine he made several 
gliding flights and waxed enthusiastic over what he saw 
and learnt.
When he returned home, he set to work with renewed 
energy, and on one of his first efforts he was lifted by an 
upward gust to a height of twelve feet above his starting 
point and remained twenty seconds in the air. He subse- 
quently carried out numerous gliding flights, in which he 
covered distances of from fifty to four hundred feet after 
launching himself into the air from heights varying from 
seven to twenty feet. But his machine was too light of 
build, and its wings were frequently damaged in rough 
landings.
He therefore constructed a stronger machine, but its 
steering gave him trouble, though he was the first to
33

--- PAGE 57 ---
34 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
recognize that it is not advisable to place the weight of the 
flyer too far below the bearing surface of the planes. His 
most successful machine was his fourth and last, which 
he proudly named " The Hawk/' This beautiful apparatus 
contained various improvements, and its vertical supports 
were furnished with small wheels that facilitated his starts 
and rendered the landings far less dangerous for the pilot's 
body, which in Lilienthars machines had to perform the 
work done by a modern aeroplane's undercarriage.
His starting method was new. A rope running over a 
pulley was attached to the machine and drawn by a horse 
or a crew of men, so that a quick run gave the machine 
an impetus which enabled it to rise into the air like a kite. 
As soon as the machine was fairly started, the connection 
was severed and gliding began.
To-day we should describe this machine as a braced 
monoplane. But in spite of his numerous improvements 
Pilcher still retained Lilienthal's method of steering by 
shifting the weight of his body. In this art, which 
demanded the muscular strength of a professional acrobat 
for its accomplishment, Pilcher attained such a high degree 
of skill that he remained immune from accidents until the 
fatal one which occasioned his death. This occurred 
through no fault of his own.
He had calculated that with the aid of a two-horse power 
engine he could remain indefinitely in the air, and con- 
structed a light benzine motor which was estimated to 
produce four horse power. But before he was able to 
test this machine he followed Lilienthal to a flyer's 
death.
In 1899 he was anxious to exhibit the flying machine 
with which he had already made so many flights to the 
members of the English Aeronautical Society. He was 
flying at a height of about thirty feet above the ground 
when a bracing wire connecting a plane with the tail broke ; 
the machine fell before the eyes of the horrified spectators, 
and Pilcher crashed from this comparatively slight elevation 
so disastrously that he died of his injuries.
Pilcher's death evoked in England the same obstinate 
enthusiasm as Lilienthal's in Germany.

--- PAGE 58 ---
S. 
OTTO LII.IEXTIIAL'S LAST MACHINE, ix WHICH HE CRASHED TO HIS DEATH ix 1890
It is curious to note that the pioneer of soaiino- Iliojit met his end in the first machine lie 
equipped with an engine that was driven by liquid carbonic acid
Facing page :>4

--- PAGE 59 ---
1). A \VRK;HT GLIDER OF 1DO-J. 
Oxi: OF THE MACHINES IN WHICH THE BROTHERS \Viucirr CARRIED
OUT THEIR SUCCESSFUL SERIES OF EXPERIMEXTS
l''nciiii, pitgf 35

--- PAGE 60 ---
SPEEDIER PROGRESS 
35
The development of aviation now became the common 
task of all mankind, instead of devolving on a few individuals. 
All over the world men took up the work of their prede- 
cessors in other lands and strove to carry it a step further 
towards the common goal.
From the vantage point gained by the experiments of 
Lilienthal and Pilcher, Octave Chanute initiated experi- 
ments in America in original and independent directions, 
and constructed a number of gliders. He had followed 
with interest the accounts given in American papers of 
Lilienthal's flights, and as a youth he had studied with 
avidity all contemporary works on the problems of flight. 
He undoubtedly derived much inspiration from Mouillard's 
U Empire de VAir, and in his own work, Progress in 
Flying, which appeared in 1893, he was the first to do 
justice to the efforts of the French pioneer.
He set to work scientifically. As a professional engineer 
 he was one of the best railway engineers of his time  
he took the point of view that he could only learn from the 
failures of others, and therefore studied all the attempts 
made to imitate the flight of birds during the previous 
centuries, reconstructing each case and endeavouring to 
obtain a clear idea of the typical errors of every experimenter.
From the result of his investigations he deduced that 
the most important problem was that of stability. While 
fully appreciating their personal courage, he realized how 
primitive were the methods of Lilienthal and Pilcher, who 
had used their own bodies as counterweights to the forces 
of Nature. It seemed to him far more reasonable to 
achieve stability by means of movable planes.
Under Lilienthal's system the pilot submitted himself to 
the whims of natural forces, but Chanute set out with the 
assumption that it was necessary to compel those forces 
to serve man's will.
In his work he was assisted by A. M. Herring, a civil 
and mechanical engineer who had already made experi- 
ments of his own for some years previously. After testing 
several models they constructed their first glider, the 
" Ladder Kite/' so called on account of its peculiar shape, 
a machine which made several good flights. But before

--- PAGE 61 ---
36 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
embarking upon researches into the realm of the unknown 
they desired to make further experiments on familiar 
ground ; Herring therefore constructed a model of Lilien- 
thal's glider, with which and the " Ladder Kite " they 
undertook a series of tests in June, 1896, among the sandhills 
of Lake Michigan near Chicago. First the Lilienthal was 
tested ; then Chanute and his assistants proceeded to a 
number of original experiments.
They made trials with the most varied types of machines, 
some of which displayed extraordinary eccentricities of 
form, though all bore signs of the remarkable technical 
talent of their gifted constructor. One of these machines 
had six pairs of wings.
The best results were obtained from a biplane model, 
spanned with bracing wires. The wings were curved 
to precisely the same angle which Lilienthal had discovered 
to be the most favourable. The apparatus had an horizontal 
and a vertical rudder on the tail. Its stability was so good 
that the pilot only needed to move from two to three inches 
to maintain his equilibrium.
After numerous trials, all systematically and scientifically 
carried out, and all of which demonstrated the suitability 
of movable wings, Chanute summarized his experiences. 
He was firmly convinced that men would some day succeed 
in flying like birds, but not until the problem of automatic 
stability was solved. The present need was for a flying 
machine of such light build and so easily navigable that the 
personal strength of the steerer would suffice to control 
it in wind. Chanute recognized the great advantage of 
experimenting machines of the simplest type that could 
carry a man, and thus he was able to verify and extend his 
observations step by step.
Herring did his share by increasing the contemporary 
knowledge of stability and the interplay of aerial forces 
on a machine's wings.
Chanute and Herring were equally enthusiastic about 
flying, and maintained that gliding was superior to any 
sport then known.
Herring's share was mainly the whole-hearted support 
he gave to Chanute's work, and when the latter, owing to

--- PAGE 62 ---
SPEEDIER PROGRESS 
37
his advanced age, could no longer take an active part 
in the tests, Herring conducted most of their practical 
experiments.
In addition to this Herring followed special paths of his 
own which led him to concentrate more and more upon the 
construction of a power-driven plane, and in 1896 and 1897 
he published an account of his rich practical and theoretical 
experience.
We now reach a period in which it is hard to distinguish 
between the development of motor and soaring flight. An 
interesting example of this difficulty is the work done by 
Langley.
Professor Samuel Pierpoint Langley was an American 
astronomer and physicist. In 1886 he diverted all his 
energies to a study of the technique of flight, and five years 
later published his book, Experiments in Aerodynamics. 
He conducted his investigations in masterly and model 
fashion, as is shown by the revolving apparatus which he 
invented. It had a diameter of sixty feet, and to its arms 
small experimental planes were attached.
Langley measured the wind resistance of different plates 
at various speeds. He observed that the resistance varied 
according to the angle at which the surface was propelled 
through the air. He also measured the falling speed of 
plates upon stationary and rotating apparatus, and found 
that the results were quite different for long, narrow and 
short, broad surfaces. Two surfaces imposed above one 
another behaved quite differently in an air current to those 
placed side by side.
In a word, Langley weighed and measured everything 
that possibly could be weighed and measured. He was 
the first expert in aerodynamics in the modern sense of 
the word. In 1893 he published his The Internal Work 
of the Wind, in which he propounded that the wind is not, 
as was commonly supposed, a homogeneous stream with a 
more or less uniform velocity.
His investigations showed that not even the tiniest particle 
of air in motion pursued a steady course, as there were 
continual agitations, upward and downward expansions, 
whirls, backward and forward thrusts, all of which were

--- PAGE 63 ---
38 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
independent of the general movement. 
This was the 
internal work of the wind.
Later Langley built flying models, but always propelled 
them by motor power.
Langley's chief merit lay in his researches. He raised 
the work of the experimenter in flying to the rank of a 
science.
Two other men of whom far too little has been heard, 
Professor J. J. Montgomery as constructor and Daniel 
Malony as pilot, were the next to carry on in America the 
work of experimenting with airplanes that could carry a 
man.
The best machine built by Montgomery was a single- 
decker tandem based on one of Langley Js models. The 
pilot's seat was in the framework between the two mighty 
wings, which were placed one behind the other, and there 
was also a tail with horizontal and vertical steering surfaces. 
But the great novelty on this plane was the device by which 
the curves of the plane could be varied to modify their 
buoyancy.
Montgomery carried out a whole series of single-handed 
experiments. The problems of balance and steering 
seemed to him still unsolved, and he reserved the problem 
of actual flying for later tests.
In the midst of his work he was debarred from further 
practical experiments by an injury to his leg, and in order 
to complete it he gave instruction in gliding to several 
men who were interested in his experiments. He may 
thus be said to have founded the first school of gliding.
Montgomery's best pilot was Maloney, who made a 
daring experiment in 1905. He had his flying machine 
carried up to a height of four thousand feet by a balloon 
inflated with hot air, and after cutting the connecting rope 
was able to test the possibilities of steering and various 
evolutions in his subsequent glide to earth. It is reported 
that Maloney flew in spirals and circles and could shoot 
forward as rapidly as the wind and then stand almost still, 
also seemingly against the wind. With amazement the 
spectators followed his movements from the ground ; 
by means of the variable curves of his planes he was able

--- PAGE 64 ---
SPEEDIER PROGRESS 
39
to perform such remarkable evolutions that the people 
safe upon the solid earth felt their hair stand up on end. 
But his most wonderful feats were his landings, which he 
accomplished with such ease and grace that they seemed to 
be attended with no difficulties whatsoever.
In order to truly appreciate the boldness of such flights 
we must put ourselves back into the spirit of that time. 
We may confidently state that Maloney's courage as a 
soarer has not been surpassed to this day.
The greatest success is often only separated by a hair's- 
breadth from the greatest danger. At the beginning of 
one of his ascents a rope from the balloon caught in the 
framework of his machine. Maloney did not notice it, 
started as usual and crashed. The impact was not very 
severe but he was picked up unconscious and died later, 
apparently from heart failure, as no serious injuries were 
discovered.
Montgomery, too, was the victim of an accident. One 
day he was caught by a wind eddy ; the steering gear of 
the apparatus was not sufficiently powerful, and the plane 
was dashed violently to earth. His injuries did not seem 
serious at first, but they proved severe enough to end his 
productive life.

--- PAGE 65 ---
THE WRIGHTS
I
T now becomes impossible to follow the development of 
gliding and soaring chronologically. 
Every country 
was at work ; all over the world construction, flying, 
testing were going on simultaneously. We will first 
consider the activities of some men who saw their results.
As the brothers Wright themselves inform us, their 
interest in the problem of flight was stimulated when they 
learnt of the death of Lilienthal in 1896. As children little 
Wilbur and his brother Orville had played at flying ; they 
were fond of their kites, and still more so of a little screw- 
plane which their father, Bishop Molton Wright, once 
brought home to them from a journey.
Lilienthars fatal accident reawakened the slumbering 
idea. All sorts of books were sought and studied, especially 
the works of Chanute, Langley, Lilienthal and Mouillard. 
" Mouillard and Lilienthal, the great missionaries of the 
flying cause, inspired us with their own unquenchable 
enthusiasm and transformed idle curiosity into the active 
zeal of workers/' There were at that time two directions 
in which flying was developing. Professor Langley was 
building his steam-driven models, while in England Sir 
Hiram Maxim constructed at enormous expense (he 
probably spent about £9,000) a large, carefully designed 
machine driven by steam. This, however, was damaged in 
its first trial and never really flew.
The other direction was that represented by Lilienthal, 
Mouillard and Chanute. " Our sympathies were with the 
latter school, partly from impatience at the wasteful extrava- 
gance of mounting delicate and costly machinery on wings 
which no one knew how to manage, and partly, no doubt, 
from the extraordinary charm and enthusiasm with which 
the apostles of soaring flight set forth the beauties of sailing 
through the air on fixed wings, deriving the motive power 
from the wind itself."
40

--- PAGE 66 ---
THE WRIGHTS 
41
The Wrights calculated that in five years of laborious 
endeavour Lilienthal only spent five actual hours in the air, 
but they were surprised that he attained such results with, 
relatively, so little practice. Thereupon the brothers took 
in hand the construction of a flying machine which was to 
develop only a low degree of speed, as it was their intention 
to fly it against a wind of its own velocity. In this way 
they believed that they would be able, while hovering over 
one spot, to remain in the air for long periods easily and 
safely. To produce such a machine they found it necessary 
to increase the area of their planes considerably, and they 
therefore did not deem it feasible to steer by shifting the 
centre of gravity as Lilienthal and Chanute had done. A 
movable elevator was attached in front of the double deck 
surfaces, while lateral balance was obtained by manipulating 
the wing tips.
In the summer of 1900 they began practical experiments 
at Kitty Hawk in North Carolina. They first sent up the 
machine as a kite, in which fashion it could lift a man with 
the aid of a stiff breeze. All sorts of experiments were 
made, and it was clearly shown that a variable curvature of 
the wing tips was far more effective than shifting the 
centre of gravity by body movements.
Soon the eager experimenters were ready for gliding 
trials. For this purpose they moved farther south where 
higher sandhills were more suitable for such flights.
It was not easy. Unlike their predecessors, the Wrights 
lay prone upon the surface of their machine. In order to 
start they had to run and then jump on to the machine as it 
rose ; when they landed, their legs had to take the shock.
The long flights for which they hoped were reduced to 
periods of two minutes, but they were well satisfied when 
they concluded their first trials, especially as they achieved 
a more perfect control over the machine than they had 
expected.
In the summer of 1901 they went again to their southern 
camp of Kill Devil with a new plane. It was bigger than 
the first, having a surface of three hundred and eight square 
feet, being, in fact, the largest gliding plane that had been 
built till then. The span of the great double decks was

--- PAGE 67 ---
42 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
twenty-two feet, the length fourteen and the height six.
With them went various people who were interested in 
the experiments, including Chanute, so that there was quite 
a little flying camp among the dunes.
The 1901 experiments were anything but hopeful, the 
only person to praise and encourage them being Chanute. 
Their machine would not soar, and so the Wrights had to 
rest content with their conviction, deduced from numerous 
gliding flights, that apparently all the measurements of 
their predecessors were inaccurate. At least correct 
measurements were so mixed up with incorrect ones that 
it seemed better to begin again from the beginning.
" We had taken up aeronautics merely as a sport. We 
reluctantly entered upon the scientific side of it, but soon 
found the work so fascinating that we were drawn into it 
deeper and deeper/'
So they set to work eagerly on laboratory experiments of 
their own, calculating the buoyancy of various kinds of 
surfaces. According to the experience thus gained a new 
plane was designed, and once again they went to the camp 
at Kill Devil.
The new biplane of 1902 had a surface measurement 
of three hundred and five square feet, and its weight 
without a pilot was one hundred and sixteen and a half 
pounds. It was so well built that it could withstand even 
bumpy landings, and carried out many gliding flights 
without suffering from wear and tear. Landing methods 
were now changed ; the pilot remained prone in the 
machine while two skids broke the shock of contact with 
the ground.
The highest point on Big Hill lay a hundred feet above 
the level ground. According to wind conditions and other 
circumstances trial flights were carried on from this or 
various lower points.
In September and October of 1902 the results obtained 
were highly satisfactory. Many flights extended more than 
six hundred feet, and some were accomplished against a 
wind velocity of thirty-six miles an hour, a sign of the 
excellent control the Wrights had over their new airplane.
Constantly helped and encouraged by Chanute's advice,

--- PAGE 68 ---
THE WRIGHTS 
43
the brothers made steady progress. They had recognized 
that true soaring demanded not only better machines but 
also better trained pilots. The Wrights still interpreted 
the word " soaring " as the power to maintain a position 
in the air above one spot. Often they succeeded in doing 
so for a time, and they also knew the difference, not yet 
clear to many even to-day, between soaring and gliding. 
They said : "In principle soaring is exactly equivalent 
to gliding, the practical difference being that in the one 
case the wind moves with an upward trend against a 
motionless surface, while in the other the surface moves 
with a downward trend against motionless air."
The only difference between this and our present concep- 
tion of soaring is that now we not only hover in the wind, 
but can even make headway against it and climb.
In the autumn of 1903 the Wrights had achieved flights 
of more than a minute's duration. Often the plane hovered 
calmly above the same spot so that an onlooker ignorant 
of its nature might have thought that it only needed feathers 
on its wings to fly like a bird.
By this time they had accumulated a mass of material 
for their calculations, and the problem of balancing in 
steady as well as in gusty winds was practically solved.
The further work of the Wrights belongs to the history 
of motor flying. Through them the great importance of 
soaring and gliding had been demonstrated for the first 
time, and the addition of a motor was a step towards 
perfection. The way of experiment and apprenticeship 
in gliding flight had been a long one, but it was a silent and 
almost invisible herald of the victorious career of motor- 
aided flight.
Although, yielding to the spirit of their time, the Wrights 
devoted themselves later entirely to motor flying, they were 
nevertheless the first to realize fully what might be achieved 
by means of soaring. They were convinced that men would 
one day be able to build themselves wings which would 
surpass those of even the best soarers among the birds.
" However, when gliding operators have attained greater 
skill, they can, with comparative safety, maintain themselves 
in the air for hours at a time in this way, and thus by

--- PAGE 69 ---
44 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
constant practice so increase their knowledge and skill that 
they can rise into the higher air and search out the currents 
which enable the soaring birds to transport themselves to 
any desired point by first rising in a circle and then sailing 
off at a descending angle."
In spite of the brilliant progress made by motor flight 
Orville Wright tried his luck still once more, on October 
24th, 1911, among the sandhills of North Carolina. He 
succeeded in remaining in the air for nine minutes and 
forty-five seconds, after which he was forced to descend 
because the contours of the dunes cut off his breeze. This 
was the brothers' last experiment in motorless flight.
Thus it came about that ten years were to elapse before 
the Wrights' record was to be beaten by a flight started on 
the German mountain known as the " Wasserkuppe."

--- PAGE 70 ---
FAMOUS CONTEMPORARIES
O
THER men were also doing good work at the same 
time as these brilliant, world-famed " Flight Kings." 
Lilienthal's influence on America had been an 
intellectual one, for the Wrights, Chanute and Herring all 
united to honour him. Meanwhile in Austria the traditions 
of the old master were being carried on ; in 1897 Nimfiihr 
acquired from LilienthaPs heirs his glider with movable 
wings and brought it to Vienna, and a year later a Berlin 
lawyer sold one of Lilienthal's original gliders to Igo 
Etrich, a manufacturer. Etrich and his father were 
regarded as visionaries by their contemporaries because 
of their interest in the problems of flight.
Nimfiihr's Lilienthal machine proved too worn out for 
safe use, but he devoted himself with much enthusiasm to 
theoretical work while the Etrichs carried out practical 
experiments. In 1899 the father and son built a glider 
with a span of thirty-three feet that was designed to be 
started from a trolley running on sloping rails, but this 
mechanism was found useless for large-sized machines.
As flying was still regarded as an acrobatic feat at that 
time, Etrich engaged Wels, the Viennese teacher of gymnas- 
tics and fencing, to carry out his practical experiments. 
After a long pause in his constructive activities Igo Etrich 
brought out in 1929 a small sporting motor plane built 
in accordance with his earlier experiences, but in more 
modern form. He tells us : " We, too, were prepared to 
learn from Nature. We studied the flight of birds and 
even enlisted as teachers two living vampire-bats. Among 
my father's many books on flying we found a work by Prof. 
Ahlborn, of Hamburg, On the Stability of Kite-like Planes. 
In this work the investigator drew attention to the flying 
seeds of a Javanese palm, zanonia macrocarp which can 
cover wide distances
" We regarded this phenomenon as a signpost of Nature.
45

--- PAGE 71 ---
46 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
We made paper models, increasing their size as we gained 
experience. In 1904 a big model of a gliding machine 
carrying a load of fifty-six pounds made quite considerable 
flights. A year later we designed a large machine with a 
span of forty feet, which was completed in the following 
year. Started from a rail trolley and carrying a bag of sand, 
it flew down into the valley in a beautiful, calm gliding 
flight, and landed smoothly, without any artificial steering, 
a thousand feet from its starting point."
How was this possible without any steering gear ?
" The chief peculiarity of the flying seed is that its wings 
have a pronounced backward and upward curve. The 
action of the zanonia^s surface is therefore the same as 
that produced by the combined effect of a wing and a 
stabilizing plane. The typical feature of my flying machine 
was that it consisted of nothing but carrying surfaces, 
which were nevertheless stable."
On October 8th and i3th, 1906, Wels carried out success- 
ful gliding flights in the presence of numerous spectators 
and flew a length of eight hundred and sixty-five feet and a 
height of sixty-five feet.
During the following winter Etrich built a motor plane 
which he provided with flexible wing tips, although he was 
still ignorant of the Wrights' experiments, which did not 
gain publicity in Europe till 1908.
Etrich was an inventor of an original turn of mind. 
When Wels, his fellow-worker, saw the brothers Wright 
fly in Paris and refused to have anything more to do with 
monoplanes, he struck out a line for himself by designing 
the Etrich-Taube, which, owing to an agreement with the 
German, Rumpler, concerning patent rights, is better 
known under the latter's name than that of its real inventor.
The Etrich-Taube was certainly as famous in Europe 
as the Wright biplane in America. It was the steadiest 
aircraft the world has ever seen and a notable product 
of the research carried out in the field of gliding.
FRANCE
Since the year 1898, Ferber, an artillery captain, had 
built and tested six different types of gliders. He was

--- PAGE 72 ---
10. 
A VIEW OF THE WORKSHOP OF ETRU'II AND WKLS, TWO Al'STRIAX PIOXEERS, AT
OJJKHALTSTADT, NEAR TKAUTEXAU
A Glider of 1901- with skids and a 1 h.p. motor-cycle engine. 
Above: A Lilienthal Glider
Facin 
^ac 4C.

--- PAGE 73 ---
X J^
11.
MARTENS ix THE " MORIT/ " (LEFT) AND THE DOUIJLE-SEATER OF THE DARMSTADT
FLYING GROUP (RIGHT)
Facing page 47

--- PAGE 74 ---
FAMOUS CONTEMPORARIES 
47
only successful when he began to imitate systematically 
the types of machines brought out first by Lilienthal and 
later by the Wrights. Building upon the foundations, he 
proceeded to original work.
Ferber undoubtedly inspired the movement which after- 
wards led to the rapid successes of flying in France. He 
it was who supported that enthusiastic patron of experi- 
mental flying, M. Archdeacon, with advice and assistance 
when he organized the first gliding trials at Berck-sur-Mer 
in 1904. He also showed the young mechanician, Voisin, 
how to handle the new apparatus, and carried out several 
scientific experiments in person. With much detail Ferber 
tells us how the brothers Voison began the career that was 
to end so brilliantly.
" After a lecture which I gave in Lyons, Gabriel Voisin 
came to me and told me that he wished to devote himself 
to flying. We recommended him as a workman to the 
engineer, Archdeacon, but he received him coldly and said 
that he had no opening for him. Voisin left Archdeacon's 
house downcast but espied before its door a broken-down 
motor-car. Always industrious, he set to work to repair 
it, and by a happy chance Archdeacon came out and saw 
the quick, neat work of the young mechanic. Convinced 
by it that such a talent might be useful to him, he gave 
Voisin a job in his works, even although there was no 
vacancy at the moment."
At first Voison was used for experiments. At Berck-sur- 
Mer he undertook a number of trial flights of various kinds 
in gliders, after which he had to fly for Archdeacon and 
later for the celebrated Bleriot in all sorts of airplanes over 
the Seine and Lake d'Enghien. He was a veritable odd 
job man ; he patched planes, rivetted fittings and repaired 
everything.
With a hydroplane which was started by being towed out 
by a motor boat Voisin reached a height of fifty-five feet 
and flew nearly five hundred. 
One such flight nearly 
ended fatally when he tried out a machine intended for 
Bleriot, as it crashed into the Seine, and the daring pilot 
had much difficulty in emerging from beneath the floating 
wings

--- PAGE 75 ---
48 
[KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
In 1905 Voisin left his employer and, with the help of 
Bleriot who put up a capital of six thousand francs, he 
made himself independent, opening an aeroplane factory 
under the style of Bleriot & Voisin. 
But Voisin soon 
outgrew this partnership and founded with his brother the 
new firm of Voisin Brothers, which made an early success 
with the Farman and Delagrange machines.
The brothers Voisin built everything that could be built 
if anyone would pay for it. They allowed themselves the 
liberty of turning out some strange machines to designs 
supplied them by their customers because they had proved 
satisfactorily that the aeroplanes built on their own plans 
always flew.
Voisin's steady progress was a great encouragement to 
many who subsequently made use of his practical experience. 
Langley in America, Maxim in England and Kress in 
Austria had endeavoured to help mankind to fly by experi- 
ments based on a profound knowledge of the science of 
engineering, but it is curious to note that while the latter 
two spent enormous sums on machines that were severely 
damaged or totally wrecked on their early trials, the brothers 
Voisin, a couple of simple mechanics who could not solve 
arithmetical problems, built aeroplanes with the knowledge 
they had gained from practical experience with gliders . . . 
and they flew.
My worthy friend, grey are all theories, 
And green alone Life's golden tree."
says Goethe, while Ferber, the teacher and patron of the 
Voisins, impressed it on his pupils that it was no great 
achievement to design a flying machine, that the man who 
built one had made some progress, but that the really 
important thing was that it should be able to fly.
Voisin always waxed enthusiastic over the gliding ex- 
periences that had helped him to his fame, and described 
gliding as the most exhilarating sport that could be imagined. 
" By means of incessantly increasing practice a glider pilot 
undergoes an extraordinary physical development. He 
rapidly gains power of decision, an accurate sense of aerial 
motion, and above all, the faculty of reacting instinctively

--- PAGE 76 ---
FAMOUS CONTEMPORARIES 
49
to unforeseen events, all of which qualities are of the highest 
value to him later when he must handle a heavy engine- 
driven machine which exacts the highest degree of 
concentration and extreme rapidity of decision at critical 
moments."
ENGLAND
" Mr. Jose Weiss as is our English custom is much 
better known in the United States as a great painter 
of English landscapes than he is in this country in his 
more important manifestation as a great pioneer of aviation." 
Thus speaks Mr. F. Grey, the editor of the English aviation 
journals, The Aeroplane and All the World's Aircraft, 
in his preface to a book by Weiss's son, Bernard, who 
gives an excellent account of the development of gliding 
and soaring up to his time in his Gliding and Soaring.
" In 1909, when I first had the honour of meeting him, 
Jose Weiss knew more about the aerodynamic design of an 
aeroplane than do any but a minute number of our leading 
aeroplane designers and aeronautical scientists to-day. 
I say this deliberately and not as a figure of speech, for our 
brightest brains to-day are constantly announcing with the 
air of a Christopher Columbus discoveries which to Jose 
Weiss were mere commonplace facts."
Everyone has seen in the circus artistes who balance 
various objects on their noses and foreheads. When such 
a man has acquired sufficient practice he can hold a walking- 
stick so still that you would think it was suspended in the 
air. But should the attention or the activity of the artiste 
falter for a moment, the stick falls to the ground at once. 
With a pendulum the exact opposite occurs. You may 
place it in any position you like, but it returns of its own 
accord to the only one in which it can find safe repose. 
It corrects mechanically every disturbance of its equilibrium.
This maintenance of equilibrium is what Jose Weiss 
meant by " natural stability." His train of thought was 
a completely independent one, and yet it developed along 
very similar lines to those which Etrich had followed. 
Both told themselves that an aeroplane must be able to 
fly by itself before human beings could be entrusted to it.

--- PAGE 77 ---
50 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
Weiss was not afraid to differ from the current opinions 
of his day. He sharply criticized Prof. Langley's views 
concerning the internal work of the wind on the ground that 
the steady ascent of smoke, clouds, or a balloon seriously 
contradicted the presence of this inner activity. In this 
respect he carried out innumerable experiments, chiefly 
with models, from which he gained rich experience. " I 
have," said he, " been experimenting with models of 
gliders on and off ever since I was a boy, but it is especially 
since Lilienthars unfortunate death that I have taken this 
up as a regular hobby, and in these past five years alone I 
reckon that I have constructed no less than some two 
hundred of these models."
The models he designed and the experiments he made 
with them are typical features of Weiss's work. None of 
his predecessors made so many trials or obtained such good 
results with small models that cost hardly anything. He 
even succeeded in calm weather in approaching the ground 
at an angle of only three degrees, i.e., his model, starting 
from a height of three feet, could glide a distance of sixty. 
These little artificial birds were possessed of such intrinsic 
stability that they could fly by themselves like real birds. 
About one of them he says : " I launched it yesterday and 
the results were so remarkable that I hardly expect to be 
believed ; I do not know that I should believe in them if 
I had not seen them myself. There was a north-east wind 
blowing at the rate of about twenty miles. I had favourable 
circumstances and I launched it about twenty times. 
Once it stood for forty seconds quite motionless. It was 
launched on the ground, rose to thirty or forty feet, did not 
turn, die nor lose its height and remained hovering like a 
hawk or a kestrel. It is a positive fact."
There have been and are to this day innumerable theories 
concerning the flight of birds. Some of them are most 
confused, and many of their exponents believe that Lang- 
ley's conceptions are the only acceptable bases for arriving 
at the nature of bird flight. Weiss, however, held that 
if it was once realized how slight a gliding angle may be 
made, how little energy is necessary to change this gentle 
downward movement into hovering or even climbing, it

--- PAGE 78 ---
FAMOUS CONTEMPORARIES 
51
would never be necessary to seek such complicated 
explanations.
Weiss did not stop short at his experiments with models. 
He built man-carrying gliders, the first of which was 
constructed in 1909. These machines differed from the 
models only in size, and were similar in flying capacity. 
The 1909 machine had what Weiss calls automatic stability ; 
it was unbraced, and therefore a predecessor of many high- 
grade modern machines. Even inexperienced pilots made 
considerable flights in it.
At first a new starting arrangement was employed. The 
take off was accomplished by the aid of two steel hawsers 
which were laid in the direction of the wind each time, the 
machine rolled downwards on a trolley, and its descent 
was hastened by a drop weight which reacted upon a 
starting rope. Later Weiss substituted steel rails for the 
hawsers and made alterations to his catapult which enabled 
it to be turned against the wind. His simplest and last 
discovery was that if the machine was merely rolled on 
wheels down a slope towards a sudden fall in the ground it 
would be lifted by the wind when it reached the edge, if 
its velocity was sufficient.
Unfortunately Weiss had to give up his experiments for 
lack of money, but his experience was not lost. Mr. 
Handley Page had always been especially interested in his 
work, and built his first aeroplanes in 1911 and 1912 on 
designs based on his deductions. 
Likewise, Weiss had 
imitated Nature, deriving much assistance from Alexander 
Keith, who was a student of birds and had an exact know- 
ledge of their anatomy. From what they had learned from 
Nature they drew conclusions which led them to principles 
of construction that could be applied to the building of 
flying machines of any size, and they pointed out that such 
planes would be found to possess a high degree of efficiency 
which could only be properly appreciated when they were 
in the air.
Have you ever seen a boomerang which, when skilfully 
thrown so that it whirls in the air, climbs high and then 
returns to its starting point ? 
Have you ever asked a learned 
man to explain this phenomenon ? 
I do not believe that

--- PAGE 79 ---
52 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
he could do so quite accurately, as the Australian boomerang 
is still a great mystery to us Europeans. Captain G. W. 
Dunne, an officer in the Royal Engineers, was greatly 
puzzled by the problem of the boomerang ; moreover he 
had long been interested in problems of flight, and we are 
told that the celebrated writer H. G. Wells helped him in 
his inquiries.
Dunne kept all his researches as secret as possible, but 
contemporaries who knew his work are of the opinion that 
his planes were in many respects better than those of the 
Wrights.
He constructed his machines according to the principle 
of boomerang flight, and his gliders therefore differed 
greatly from all that had gone before. Here it is very 
interesting to observe that by entirely different methods he 
reached conclusions almost identical with those obtained by 
Weiss from his observation of bird flight and by Etrich 
from the study of his flying seed. Like Etrich he built a 
tailless plane in which longitudinal stability of the wings 
was obtained by an arrow-shaped arrangement of surfaces. 
The wing tips were curved upwards, like those of the Taube.
To-day many experts are interested in the idea of a 
gigantic aeroplane without a tail. It would consist of 
nothing but a vast wing capable of harbouring passengers, 
engines and freight, and would be able to fly great distances. 
It is certain that this type will be achieved at some future 
date because gliders and soarers had almost developed it 
before a practical engine-driven aeroplane was evolved.
BACK TO GERMANY
The circle of the wonderful development of a technical 
novelty is now completed. It began in Germany ; 
England took it up and studied and tested it. America 
and Austria developed it practically ; French ardour and 
enthusiasm converted a whole country to a love of aviation. 
But in his homeland Lilienthal and his work seemed 
almost forgotten.
In 1907, however, Offermann experimented at Aachen 
with a biplane built on the Wrights* system. Later

--- PAGE 80 ---
FAMOUS CONTEMPORARIES 
53
he went to the Harz Mountains, where he had an artificial 
starting-hill laid out for him. He started his machine by 
means of a catapult and a drop-weight.
In 1909 and 1910 he began original experiments with 
two new machines, which were so constructed that he could 
turn his two wings in similar or opposite directions. His 
most interesting machine was a so-called " Duck," a fuselage 
machine with very low resistance and an elevator that rose 
from the body which projected in front of the wings.
There is one man in Germany who does not forget 
Lilienthal, and that is his brother Gustav. If to-day you 
should arrive by aeroplane at the Berlin Air Port you will find 
in one of the side hangars a grey-haired man working on a 
gigantic bird, and when you tell him that you have just 
arrived by the regular Air Service he will shake his head. 
" That is nothing," he will say, " nothing at all ; that is 
only brutal force. The engine drags you through the air. 
Also what soarers do to-day is nothing. They fly, it is 
true, with their stiff, stark wings a hundred miles across 
country and rise to a height of ten thousand feet, but it is 
all nothing. Look here, you must be able to beat your 
wings like my bird ; then you will easily fly like birds."
Then the old man will resume work on his apparatus. 
He will turn a crank, and great wings will rise up groaning. 
At one spot a spar may crack and a cloud of dust whirl up.
Reverently we must listen to the tale of how he and his 
brother searched and strove and flew. And if he then speaks 
of his own work in the days when he trod the path which 
we now know to be a false one despite the many grains of 
truth with which it is strewn, we dare not contradict the 
man who swore to be faithful to an idea, and cannot now free 
himself from it.
Outside, before the great hangar, the aeroplanes start and 
land, and among them you will see light machines designed 
on models constructed from the experience won in gliding 
and soaring. Their diminutive engines are almost toys, 
but they have a great future.
Sport, youth and technique pursue hand in hand the 
path to victory.

--- PAGE 81 ---
TEN YEARS OF COMPETITION TEN YEARS OF
EXPERIENCE
E
VEN many of those who are well acquainted with the 
history of the Rhon gliding and soaring movement 
believe that it began with the first competition in 
1920, and that no work was done between 1910 and 1920. 
The tests and experiments made by the Darmstadt High 
School boys in their free time were generally regarded as 
mere amateurish sport, but nevertheless we owe them far 
more than might appear at first sight. The soaring flight 
district of the Rhon was first opened up by these 
boys.
In the year 1909 one of them, Hans Gutermuth, went 
with his friends to the International Aeronautic Exhibition 
in Frankfort-on-the-Maine. Impressionable as such youths 
are, they went home filled with enthusiasm and began 
to make and fly their own models. They founded a Flying 
Sport Club, and proceeded to construct monoplane and 
biplane hanging gliders on the model of Lilienthal's 
machines. The first flights were made from a woodstack 
and from " Chimborazo," an elevation on the Darmstadt 
parade ground. Young as were these enthusiastic disciples 
of flying, they were heart and soul in their work. They 
built planes of varying types, learned much, gained much 
experience by each new effort and kept careful technical 
records of all their work. Soon they felt the need of higher 
hills for their starts. In the autumn of 1910 Hans Guter- 
muth and his friend Berthold Fischer set out on a tour through 
Germany and carefully explored many mountain regions. 
They wandered through the Thuringian, the Harz and the 
Rhon Mountains, and in the Rhon, on the Wasserkuppe, 
they discovered the ideal field for flying practice, although 
it was only possible for them to begin their trial flights 
there when a cowshed was placed at their disposal. It 
was workshop, dormitory, and hangar. Then, in the

--- PAGE 82 ---
12. THE MACHINE BUILT BY KLEMPERER FOR THE AACIIEX FLYING CLUB. KLEMPERER'S WORK 
WAS SIGXALI/ED FROM TIIE VERY BEGIXXIXG BY A SOUXD KNOWLEDGE OF AERODYNAMICS
Facing page

--- PAGE 83 ---
13. 
wt KONSUL," THE MACHINE BELONGING TO THE DARMSTADT 
ACADEMIC FLYING GROUP. 
A PROTOTYPE OF TIM: MODEKN HIGH- 
PERFORMANCE MACHINE WTIH A WIDE SPAN-
14. 
TlIE TAILLESS MACHINE 
IN WHICH Ll-U SCII CRASHED TO HIS 
DEATH IN CONSEQUENCE OF A BROKEN WING A FT Ell A SHORT BUT
PERFECT SOAKING FLIGHT
page 55

--- PAGE 84 ---
TEN YEARS OF COMPETITION & EXPERIENCE 55
holidays of 1911 and 1912, the hilltop became the home of 
eager building and flying activity. How enthusiastic they 
were may be gathered from the fact that nearly thirty 
gliding planes of different types were built. The first of 
these, which were spanned with linen sheets, carried out 
from the Wasserkuppe flights of from six hundred to a 
thousand feet long. As early as in 1912 Hans Gutermuth 
flew a distance of nearly three thousand feet and remained 
in the air for one minute and fifty-two seconds.
When criticizing these results, we must not forget that 
it was not easy to find young people of that age who were 
ready and willing to take up such earnest work and face 
all the hardships it involves or who possessed the necessary 
patience and staying power. The reason that so little is 
known about this labour of love on the Wasserkuppe may 
be due to the fact that five out of the ten comrades who took 
part in it found an airman's death on the battle-field. 
But their tradition of comradeship and of mutual assistance 
in scientific and technical work was taken over by the 
Academic Flying Group of Darmstadt, which has played a 
part of the greatest moment in the development of soaring 
flight.
The activities on the Wasserkuppe that eyrie on the 
Rhon form the finest memorial to these young pioneers.
THE ROUSSEAU OF FLYING
At the Jubilee prizegiving after the tenth great Rhon 
Flying Competition a man stood with the successful 
pilots who was destined to take no large sums of money 
home with him, to receive no silver badge or cup.
He was greatly surprised to receive anything at all, for 
he was not a pilot. And yet he was presented with a 
special honorary prize! A hat! Yes! A fine, new 
broad-brimmed hat ! ! 
But the hat itself was not the 
essential thing. What really mattered was its ribbon band, 
which bore the legend " For the next ten years."
And so his old hat was superseded, and high time too. 
That old hat, so runs the saga, Father Ursinus of the Rhon 
first placed upon his head in the year 1920, swearing that

--- PAGE 85 ---
56 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
he would wear it and no other until Soaring Flight had 
become alive, independent and vigorous.
And indeed such strong measures seemed necessary at 
that time, for the work required to bring about the desired 
result seemed to assume gigantic proportions to the soarers 
of that day. They had no basis to start on no experience 
 no enterprise no money. 
In those dreary days that 
followed upon the end of the war even the boldest hung 
their heads for a time, but then it was that Oscar Ursinus, 
a civil engineer of Frankfurt-on-the-Maine and publisher 
of the magazine Flugsport, arose and called about him a 
body of disciples. Even as Rousseau preached the return 
to nature to a world rigid in its conventionality, so Ursinus 
preached to aviators the return to gliding and soaring.
Everyone knew that the flying barndoor or wire cage 
with its 400 h.p. engine was not on the right path to the 
future development of flying, but Ursinus was the first 
to point out and open up the correct way. He emphasized 
again and again that flyers must go back to the era of 
motorless flight in order to free themselves from the habit 
of relying upon a too great reserve of mechanical power. 
He urged them to pursue the personal and practical study 
of gliding and soaring side by side with that of the constant 
improvement of scientific technical equipment. Their 
primary object, he maintained, should be to make flying 
once more a sport in the true sense of the word and so to 
acquire new knowledge and perhaps eventually lay the 
foundations for the development of the new light flying 
machine that was to come.
First a fund was collected. Clubs, industrial concerns, 
and the state all contributed to it some of them 
freely, others unwillingly enough. But this did not suffice. 
Man is a sluggard and must be shaken up from time to time. 
So articles accompanied by maps began to appear in 
Flugsport ; they described the part of the Rhon district 
and gave information as to how to reach this " wild 
country " by train. A depot for the supply of materials 
was opened, and ways and means for lodging moneyless 
young folk were thought out. Then it was that Ursinus, 
the aeroplane constructor, planned the " sleeping-box,"

--- PAGE 86 ---
TEN YEARS OF COMPETITION & EXPERIENCE 57
a collapsible box that could be carried easily from one spot 
to another, set up anywhere on the mountain and used as 
a bunk.
And then came the announcement of the first meeting.
Prizes were offered for flights in motorless gliders, with 
the object of promoting gliding as a sport.
There was a prize for the best utilization of the wind as 
a lifting power, and another for a flight actuated by man 
power, the object of which was to develop the length of 
gliding flights and bridge over gaps between upward gusts 
of wind by human skill and strength.
There was also a competition for planes provided with 
small auxiliary motors that would do the work otherwise 
done by man power. The highest motor power allowed 
for these was 5 h.p., the special aim of this class being to 
decrease as far as possible the motor power of aircraft.
1' It is difficult to leave the old paths for new and un- 
known ones. Efforts to develop in new directions the 
flying modern machines, in which the flyer may be said to 
sit upon the motor, will not help us far towards the attain- 
ment of our ambitions. It is better to begin again from 
the beginning. How much horsepower is necessary to 
enable us to fly ? 
This is the question which the Rhon 
shall answer. ..."
And, positively, things began to move everywhere. The 
Society for Scientific Aeronautics became honorary patrons 
of the scheme. Four wooden barracks were put together 
on the Wasserkuppe, in which a dormitory, a workshop and 
a meteorological observatory were fitted up. Tents were 
erected, and thirty camp beds were provided. And now 
began very gradually at first a pilgrimage to the Wasser- 
kuppe. Each pilgrim had to bring his own pillow and 
blanket ; very grand folk had sleeping sacks and hammocks. 
Camp stools, cameras and the like were luxuries, but pots 
and pans and tools were matters of great importance. 
Ablution facilities were arranged in the open air at the 
spring which is the source of the Fulda.
Under these conditions flying enthusiasts worked happily 
together ; there were senators and students, carpenters 
and engineers, war pilots and men who could not fly at all.

--- PAGE 87 ---
58 
[KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING]
And what a beginning! There were many useless efforts! 
And then, on August 6th, 1920, at four in the afternoon, 
a little white monoplane was seen to float for nearly ten 
seconds above the same spot ! 
Two days later Freiherr 
v. Lossl, flying a machine of his own construction, remained 
in the air for forty seconds and covered a distance of 
four hundred and fifty yards.
It was not easy at first, but their hopes ran high. At 
one time, however, it seemed as if they were to be denied 
even the consolation of hope.
On August gth, v. Lossl started with the intention of 
carrying out a longer flight. The weather was unreliable, 
the wind very capricious, and great clouds hung above the 
summit. Maintaining a good height, v. Lossl was gliding 
along over the steep hillside, when suddenly a heavy squall 
took him by surprise. His elevator was not strong enough ; 
it broke, and he crashed after a flight of eighty seconds, in 
which he covered a distance of eight hundred and eighty 
yards. On August gth, 1896, Lilienthal had crashed, all 
alone in the Rhinow Hills, and now, twenty-four years 
later, when the German soaring flight movement was 
making its first efforts towards a new and vigorous life, the 
supreme sacrifice was exacted from its second pioneer.
But those who thought that this accident would check 
the movement failed to realize the wonderful Rhon spirit. 
Just this flight had demonstrated the possibilities of utilizing 
a strong wind. The highest honour that could be paid to 
Lossl was to carry on his work, and this was done with 
redoubled zeal.
But at that stage very little could be achieved. The 
results almost seemed to show that flights in a hanging 
glider after the model of Lilienthars (Pelzner demonstrated 
his marvellous bodily skill in one of these) were to be our 
best feats. Then, a few days before the close of the 
meeting, a new machine arrived. Herr Klemperer, an 
engineer of Aachen, had constructed it on a totally new plan ; 
it had thick cantilever wings, and was lighter than any 
machine of the new type which had been hitherto built.
With this " Schwarzer Teufel " (Black Devil) Klemperer, 
a former war pilot, flew on September 4th, 1920, for two

--- PAGE 88 ---
TEN YEARS OF COMPETITION & EXPERIENCE 59
minutes and twenty-three seconds, covering a distance of over 
a mile. Three days later he made a highly interesting flight 
in which he flew for forty-five seconds at a wind velocity of 
from fifteen to twenty yards per second, covering a distance 
of only two hundred and fifty yards, but rising thirty- 
three feet above the starting place. This was real soaring.
This was, of course, only a modest beginning, but the 
real success was not to be reckoned in figures. The 
right people had come together ; enthusiasm had been 
awakened. " Next year we will be here again with twice 
as many machines, which will be very different ones from 
those of to-day. And at least, we know now how to fly 
them." These and many similar words were heard when 
the camp broke up.
Moreover, various independent experimenters were 
present who did not take part in the general competition, 
among them being Herr Harth, an architect, who had been 
experimenting since 1910. In 1916, starting from the 
Heidelstein, a hill in the Rhon district, he had flown for 
three and a half minutes without losing height, using a 
machine he had planned and constructed in conjunction with 
a certain Messerschmidt. He made some good flights in 
the course of the meeting.
Meanwhile an interesting model was being tried out in 
all secrecy in the Black Forest. Wenk had designed a plane 
without a tail, which was as far as possible an imitation of 
the pinions of an albatross. On August I5th, 1920, this 
plane described a complete figure of eight, in the course of 
which the soarer flew twice over the starting place on the 
Feldberg at a height of sixty-six feet. The flight lasted 
two minutes and a half and finished quite near to its start.
In 1921 there were twice as many competitors as in the 
previous year. 
Among the newcomers was Ferdinand 
Schulz, who was destined to rise to fame later, and several 
interesting groups of flyers from the Universities and 
Technical Colleges of Darmstadt, Hanover and Munich. 
In a fortnight a hundred and twenty-eight flights were made.
One of the prizes offered this year was known as " The 
Great Rhon Prize." To win it a flight of five minutes 
was required, which had to finish at a landing place not

--- PAGE 89 ---
60 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
more than one hundred and sixty-five feet below the 
starting-point. This demanded true soaring, and no one 
succeeded in fulfilling the conditions. The indefatigable 
Pelzner had often succeeded in flying for fifty seconds in 
his hanging glider, and later he increased his time to more 
than a minute. His feats alone justified the severe demands 
made upon better machines.
Klemperer had brought his excellent plane, and on 
August 8th he made a gliding flight of thirteen minutes and 
a half. 
But now he had a rival, for the Hanover student, 
Martens, beat Klemperer's distance record on August aist 
by nearly two miles. He had a new plane, the " Vampire," 
which had been designed by an engineer, Dr. Madelung, 
with the help of Prof. Proll and another engineer named 
Dorner. This is the machine that for years remained the 
best type for soaring flight and may be regarded as the 
first example of a modern high efficiency machine. The 
fundamental principle in the construction of this plane 
was the resemblance of its wings to those of sea birds, 
their span being very wide and shallow. A few days after 
its trial flight it carried Martens for a gliding flight of over 
two miles, in the course of which he described two complete 
circles. Then Klemperer regained the record with a 
flight of nearly four miles and a half, only to have it wrested 
from him again by Martens shortly afterwards.
But in spite of all efforts these flights were merely glides ; 
the art of soaring still remained a sealed book to most 
flyers. The industrious Harth undertook further secret 
trials, and at length showed the world how soaring flights 
could be accomplished. On September i3th, 1921, he 
gained a world record by flying above the Heidelstein for 
twenty-one and a half minutes, in the course of which he 
soared correctly in a wind of from ten to twelve yards per 
second. He circled repeatedly above his starting-place, 
flew along a considerable stretch of slope ; demonstrated 
his ability to turn, and finally landed only 170 yards from 
his starting point and forty feet below it. It was a fine 
piece of flying work.
This year also demanded its sacrifice. Wenk's tail- 
less soarer, which had been flown in the Black Forest the

--- PAGE 90 ---
TEN YEARS OF COMPETITION & EXPERIENCE 61
year before, had come to the Rhon meeting this year, and 
on August I4th an experienced war pilot, Wilhelm Leusch, 
started in it.
This machine started differently from the others ; 
it was hoisted on the shoulders of several men, who ran 
with it against the wind. 
Silently the plane rose, and 
began to climb towards the storm. The impression made 
upon everyone present was indescribable ; hitherto they 
had only seen gliding flights, but this was soaring. When 
the machine had been little more than a minute in the air 
and flown about a mile above its starting place, a cloud 
compelled the pilot to turn away. The turn became 
steeper and steeper until people realized that something  
probably the steering had gone wrong. Suddenly a wing 
broke off, and the plane crashed down, burying the pilot 
beneath its wreckage.
Those were heavy hours and days, but soaring flight 
could not now be checked, even by such sad accidents. 
Before the end of another year exploits were to be per- 
formed which would be famous all over the world. The 
way had been wearisome and hard, but the ideal that was 
behind the movement had become reality and deed.

--- PAGE 91 ---
RECORDS
D
EVELOPMENTS followed as a natural result of 
what had been learned. We may undoubtedly call 
this first period of soaring flight the technical period, 
for at that time the primary need was to create a machine 
which should enable the pilot to show his skill. The 
tradition of heavily braced machines had been broken, and 
the instructors had learnt to combine extreme lightness 
with extreme solidity. Klemperer had pointed out the way 
with his " Schwarzer Teufel," while the Hanover man's 
" Vampire " was a technical triumph of its epoch.
The inevitable results followed. It was the turn of the 
pilots to get out of the machines all that there was to be got. 
The sporting period, therefore, began, the importance of 
which was the publicity given to the exploits and feats 
of the pilots. Many who knew little or nothing of the 
activities in the Rhon Mountains now became aware that 
something great and new had come into existence.
Many sacrifices were made and many things which we 
should have liked to do were postponed in order that we 
might concentrate upon advancing as rapidly as we could 
the promotion of the highest possible efficiency and 
practical usefulness. We centred our endeavours upon 
true soaring, and consequently the chief prizes offered in 
1922 were : one for the longest duration flight, one for 
the lowest sinking speed and one for the longest distance 
flight. The conditions laid down for the competitors were 
so extraordinarily difficult that it seemed dubious whether 
it was possible to fulfil them.
The whole course of the 1922 Meeting was extremely 
exciting. 
Continual contests took place between single 
pilots or groups of pilots. For one prize which had been 
offered for a flight to a goal, a veritable duel was fought 
out between Botsch, of Darmstadt, in the " Edith," and 
Hentzen, of Hanover, in the " Vampire." First Botsch
62

--- PAGE 92 ---
RECORDS 
63
succeeded in flying to within one hundred and sixty-two 
feet of the goal a feat in itself but the next day Hentzen 
came within one hundred and forty-four feet of it. This 
spurred on Botsch's ambition once more; he started out 
and completed the first true soaring flight of the Meeting 
in the presence of a cheering crowd of spectators. He 
worked up from the south slope of the Wasserkuppe until 
he had attained a height of two hundred and seventy feet 
above the starting place, and then shot forward like a bird 
of prey towards the goal, landing only forty-eight feet from 
it. But meanwhile Hentzen was again in the air, and this 
time his landing place was only thirteen and a half feet 
from the goal. 
His feat enabled the Hanoverians to 
gain the victory in this contest.
Two days later came the first great event of the competi- 
tion the soaring flight. Martens, of Hanover, started in 
his " Vampire ; " on the west slope he soon rose in a 
graceful flight to a height of three hundred and thirty feet 
above the starting point. 
He soared far above it over the 
heads of the watching crowd, who, never having seen such 
a thing before, stood spellbound with amazement, while he 
continuously circled above them. Forty minutes flying time 
were required by the conditions of the great prize, but when 
twenty-five had passed the wind weakened and continued 
to drop until Martens could hardly keep himself up. 
But suddenly he rose again and flew onward like a great 
bird, remaining in the air (for the first time within human 
ken) for more than an hour without the aid of motor power. 
To cap this exploit, Martens finally embarked upon 
a long distance flight and landed six miles away from the 
starting place, and one thousand six hundred and fifty 
feet below it in the valley.
This feat was hailed with mingled joy and amazement, for 
it seemed to us that the whole world must now be convinced 
of the possibility of motorless flight. But on the very 
day this record, too, was broken, for Hentzen, a fellow- 
student of Martens, made a flight of two hours and ten 
seconds duration in the " Vampire." But this failed to 
satisfy him, and on August 24th, 1922, he gained his world 
record of three hours and six minutes by reaching a height

--- PAGE 93 ---
64 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
of somewhere between one thousand and one thousand 
one hundred and fifty feet above the Wasserkuppe.
Another marvellous affair was the struggle between the 
Academic Flying Groups of Darmstadt and Hanover during 
the last days of the meeting. Far, far up on high hung the 
" Vampire " and the " Geheimrat," and below them 
various other machines. In the strong wind the planes 
remained nearly motionless in the air (at times they were 
even driven backwards) and the mighty crowd which had 
been attracted by interest in our feats, followed their every 
turn with rapt attention.
One achievement continued to surpass another, until it 
was difficult in the end to say which had made the deepest 
impression the wonderful duration flights or Botsch's 
amazing storm flight in the " Edith."
By this time other countries had begun to be interested 
in gliding and soaring. This year the Dutchman, Fokker, 
the famous designer of aeroplanes, had come to the^Rhon 
with a two-seater plane, and was the first pilot to remain in 
the air for any considerable period in a motorless plane 
carrying two persons. His time was a quarter of an hour. 
Technical experts from Holland, Scandinavia, and America 
spent many days on the Wasserkuppe, and the evenings 
were filled with lively and most interesting discussions 
between theorists and practical men.
The exploits recorded above were performed in machines 
constructed on familiar and approved lines, but many 
technical novelties were also on exhibition. In addition 
to new designs brought forward by the Darmstadt, Hanover, 
Dresden, and Munich Groups, there were the remarkable 
tailless aeroplane of the Berlin Scientific Flying Association 
and Klemperer's " Duck." Characteristic of the far- 
seeing work done by the constructors of that day is the fact 
that even then they built types of machines that are as 
interesting to-day as they were then, while the exploitation 
of the possibilities they afforded is by no means at 
an end.
The Meeting of 1922 was a tremendous stride forward 
in every respect. For the first time in a Flying Meeting 
the results had far surpassed all expectation. We knew

--- PAGE 94 ---
RECORDS 
65
exactly along what lines we must work and could look 
forward with confidence to the next year.
It was a matter of course that, inspired by these results, 
men in other countries should try their luck at gliding and 
soaring. In France there were great differences of opinion 
as to the value of the movement ; but men of position and 
name, such as Farman and Breguet, took up the cudgels for 
it, while the effective propaganda of Magnan, who is noted 
for his research work in connection with soaring, caused 
the offer of a prize for competitive soaring flight. The 
stretch of country over which the flights were to take place 
was not so favourable as that of the Rhon Mountains, 
but this was not the sole reason why this Meeting, in which 
so many competitors had entered, showed results far 
behind those of the German competitions. The experience 
in construction and in the art of flying, which had been 
acquired with such patient effort in the Rhon, was lacking 
here. The longest flight which was made with a Farman 
plane, lasted five minutes and eighteen seconds.
Very noteworthy in the French competition was the plane 
flown by the American, Alien, which was planned and built 
by the teachers and pupils of the well-known Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. Towards the end of the Meeting 
a monoplane tandem built by Peyret arrived, but failed to 
achieve anything of note.
In England the Daily Mail took the lead in the move- 
ment by offering a large prize. The first English Meeting 
took place from October i6th 2ist at Itford Hill, where 
the territory was most favourable and the results excellent. 
The Frenchman Maneyrol, flying a monoplane tandem, 
broke the German record by remaining in the air for three 
hours twenty-one minutes and seven seconds, while a series 
of other fine flights were made in which many of the flyers 
remained aloft for more than an hour at a time. How good 
the upwind conditions must be there is evident from the 
fact that Grey flew in a machine which had been put 
together from the wings of one motor-plane and the cock- 
pit of another. This plane, which was at first treated as a 
huge joke, was christened the " Brokker " because the 
fuselage had been taken from an English Bristol warplane

--- PAGE 95 ---
66 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
while the steering gear had belonged to a German machine, 
the Fokker " D.y." But so good were the flying conditions 
that even this plane did great things under Grey's wonder- 
fully skilful piloting.
The hilly land on which this competition took place 
extends in both northward and southward directions. The 
wind on the chief soaring day had a velocity of forty- 
nine feet per second. The greater steepness of the slopes 
produces better upwind conditions but demands special 
flying tactics, and the thanks of the promoters are due to 
Fokker for having made this clear from the very beginning. 
He arrived there in good time to study the country and made 
careful observations by means of kites. 
So cleverly was he 
able to take advantage of the strong currents that on 
September i6th he soared with a passenger for thirty- 
seven minutes. 
Five days later the Englishman Olley 
flew in the Fokker plane with a passenger for forty-nine 
minutes.
On the whole planes that could do very little in the Rhon 
were able to make quite good flights under the more favour- 
able wind conditions in England.
Undoubtedly the best machine there was the "Maneyrol," 
which was in fact an exact, full-sized replica of the model 
which Prof. Langley had built long before. Although 
technical experts had expressed the most unfavourable 
opinions with regard to the chances and capabilities of this 
machine, it proved, in spite of them, what a genius old 
Langley had been.
In the meantime Germany was preparing for another 
competition. In Berlin was founded the Soaring Flight 
Association, the forerunner of that great Association which 
to-day directs flying progress in Germany The Rhon- 
Rossitten Gesellschaft. It had as its objects the furtherance 
of Soaring Flight in all respects commercially, scientific- 
ally and as a sport.
Great expectations centred round the forthcoming 
competition, but difficulties soon began to arise. In the 
early period of soaring flight in all countries we find that 
over-much importance is attributed to endurance flights

--- PAGE 96 ---
RECORDS 
67
and their records. Although duration flying was very 
necessary in the early days in order to accumulate soaring 
experience, persistence in such flights after their purpose 
has been served is the surest way to bring a promising 
beginning to a standstill. Duration flight only trains 
pilots with staying power and neglects the sensitive ones. 
It does not lead to that progress in the technical and 
scientific directions upon which all future development 
must be based. Many flyers recognized this fact, but they 
were uncertain as to the direction in which progress was 
to be expected and looked for it along the lines of the 
previous year's developments.
Prizes were offered for distance flights of more than 
twelve miles, during which a height of over one thousand 
one hundred and fifty feet should be attained. 
Soaring 
with the aid of a small engine, which had fallen into the 
background during the last meeting, was again brought 
forward, but the general interest was so concentrated upon 
soaring proper that few competitors were found to enter 
for this prize.
On the other hand there once more appeared a whole host 
of new machines of notable and interesting construction. 
In addition to various experiments with planes provided 
with wings that could be turned or curved, the constructive 
type which promised most for the future was the " Konsul," 
sent by the Darmstadt Group. It had pinions with a span 
of sixty-six feet, which were attached to a slender cockpit 
of ply-wood. This was certainly a daring experiment 
at the time, but later it fully proved its value.
In spite of its ninety-seven entries, the Meeting of 1923 
fell far below the level of the previous year. No one 
succeeded in reaching prize standard. The extremely 
unfavourable weather must be blamed chiefly for this 
result. 
The best achievements were an eleven-mile 
distance flight by the " Konsul " and a flight in which 
Hackmack attained a height of a thousand feet. This 
flight of Hackmack's was made in a heavy storm, and was 
chiefly valuable for its demonstration that soaring was 
possible in all kinds of weather, provided that the machines 
were sufficiently strongly built.

--- PAGE 97 ---
68 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
The day after this flight was devoted to the unveiling 
and dedication of a memorial which had been erected on 
the summit of the Wasserkuppe to the memory of those who 
had lost their lives in the service of flying. It had been 
arranged that flights should be made in their honour, and 
in spite of a violent storm the chosen pilots started. 
Dramatic scenes were witnessed, because in spite of the 
bad weather no one could be dissuaded from putting his 
machine and skill to the test in honour of this ceremony. 
Thomsen's plane, however, proved unequal to the struggle 
with the heavy squalls ; the wings began to sway more and 
more violently, and he tried to land. He brought his 
machine to within six yards of the ground, where one wing 
broke oif suddenly, and the plane crashed. Trachinsky's 
" Galgen-Vogel " (Gallows Bird) had no better luck, as it was 
dashed against a hillside and wrecked. Both pilots escaped 
with injuries, but the day demanded its human sacrifice. 
The plane piloted by Max Standfuss was not strong enough 
for the storm, so that the breakage of a wing at a height of 
a hundred feet caused it to crash.
But once again the tragedy only served as an incitement 
to the survivors. The flights in the storm had made a 
tremendous impression upon all who saw them. But, 
nevertheless, and in spite of the fine distance flight which 
Botsch brought off shortly before the close of the Meeting, 
it ended on a note of depression.
The official French Meeting of this year achieved no 
noteworthy results, a flight of three miles by Flight- 
Lieutenant Simonet proving the highest attainment. There 
was also a fatal accident when the over-weak wings of 
Hemmerdinger's plane broke. But certain special flying 
feats before this Meeting had already demonstrated the 
good results of the experience which had been gained from 
the first French competition. For one of them a very 
fine flying field was chosen, and it proved so excellent that 
Flight-Lieutenant Thoret was able to keep on soaring in 
his motor-plane of the " Hanriot H.D. 14 " type when the 
engine stopped. This record flight of seven hours and 
three minutes was flown in the neighbourhood of Biskra 
on January 3rd, 1923.

--- PAGE 98 ---
RECORDS 
69
This feat of endurance was beaten by Louis Peyret with 
the plane with which Maneyrol had already done great 
things in England. Peyret flew for eight hours and five 
minutes at Vauville, near Cherbourg, and two days later 
Georges Barbot, flying a Dewoitine monoplane, beat 
his record with eight hours thirty-six minutes and fifteen 
seconds.
The balancing of our accounts for that year would show 
Germany best in distance flying but France more than 
twice as far ahead in endurance flying.

--- PAGE 99 ---
THE LEAN YEARS
UT other results were obtained which proved far 
more important than mere records. 
In the first 
place it was demonstrated that gliding and soaring 
were practicable over various types of country.
The German flyers came together for a meeting in 
Vienna, where Martens flew six miles, remaining in 
the air for three quarters of an hour, while the tailless 
plane belonging to the Berlin group made itself conspicuous 
by many pretty flights. The Vienna meeting was also 
noteworthy for the appearance of a new " ace," in the 
person of " Espe," as his comrades nicknamed young 
Gottlob Espenlaub. He was one of the early pioneers of 
the Rhon, where he had even spent the winters of 1921 and 
1922. A shopkeeper in the district told me later that 
" Espe " had come to him one autumn and bought a 
sack of oatmeal, which, with a little dripping, was his sole 
supply of food for the winter. But he brought to Vienna 
two planes he had built with his own hands. He could not 
fly ! 
So he had to look on while a strange pilot smashed 
one of them to pieces.
" I couldn't do it worse myself," said Espenlaub, and 
started off in the other machine one morning before anyone 
was awake, although he had not the least notion of what to 
do in the air. This first flight of his life was made from a 
hill a thousand feet high, and he flew nearly two miles  
a most unique feat, for his maiden flight won a 