distance prize.
From that time on " Espe " made his own crashes, and 
played a great role in the history of German soaring flight. 
He is a living example to flyers of what it is possible to 
accomplish alone and unaided. He is the son of a shep- 
herd, and began his associations with the Wasserkuppe by 
fetching water for the landlord of the " Baude " (The Hut) 
as we call our first shelter there. Thus he earned many a 
plate of hot soup.
7o

--- PAGE 100 ---
15. 
THE " ESPENLAUB 5 " IN FLIGHT. 
ONE OF THE MACHINES WHICH ESPENLAUB. THE
JOINER, BUILT AND FLEW
Facing page 70

--- PAGE 101 ---
16. FERDINAND Scin LZ IN HIS "BROOMSTICK/' A MACIIIXI: WHICH
ACCOMPLISHED MARVELLOUS FLATS IN SPITE OF ITS PRIMITIVE
FORM
I''a(>nz bate 71

--- PAGE 102 ---
THE LEAN YEARS 
71
In the year 1923, soaring flight freed itself from its 
dependence upon the Rhon, and became popular in many 
hill districts of Germany. But everyone was greatly 
surprised when the East Prussian Flying Association 
ventured to announce a Soaring Competition in Rossitten, 
which was carried out in spite of many difficulties.
Such spectacular achievements as those of the Rhon 
were not to be expected here. But the East Prussian, 
Ferdinand Schulz, an elementary school teacher, had 
demonstrated that soaring was feasible over low sandhills. 
Like the brothers Wright, whose work he may be said to 
have continued, he started from dunes, the greatest height 
of which does not exceed two hundred feet, and flew along 
them. He remained in the air for six minutes and attained 
an elevation of a hundred feet above his starting point.
In order rightly to appreciate his feat, it must be remem- 
bered that his machines were primitive in the extreme. He 
had built them himself, without suitable material, and 
overcame their technical deficiencies by his marvellous 
skill and tenacity.
Experiments were also made with a sea-glider, but the 
results were unsatisfactory. The important thing was the 
recognition of the district as good flying country, for the 
noteworthy successes achieved at Rossitten in later years were 
undoubtedly built up on the experiences of this first meeting.
Before the end of the year a flying meeting took place in 
England which clearly demonstrated the practical side of 
soaring, although the meeting was originally arranged for 
the purpose of promoting the development of aeroplanes 
with light engines. It proved a complete success, some 
marvellous results being obtained with machines carrying 
motor-cycle engines of from ten to 20 h.p. In certain 
machines, as for example the Handley Page aeroplanes, 
it was easy to trace the direct results of soaring flight ; 
they were, in fact, merely soaring planes with an auxiliary 
engine. In other types, too, the influence of the experience 
gained from the designing and building of soaring machines 
was clearly visible. 
Great progress was made in the designs 
for lightly built machines, while considerable improvement 
was noted in steering gear.

--- PAGE 103 ---
72 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
We looked forward hopefully to 1924. Early in the 
spring things began to liven up. The Rossitten Meeting 
revealed the ardent enthusiasm and desire for new achieve- 
ments that had developed during the winter.
The finest feat of this Rossitten Meeting was the dura- 
tion feat made by Schulz, a man who has fought his way 
to the front in spite of all the obstacles attendant on his 
lack of technical knowledge and all the various resources 
which were at the service of the academic flying groups. 
His planes were so weak and primitive that they had been 
condemned at the technical tests applied to machines that 
were entered for the competitions of the Wasserkuppe the 
previous year. But here in East Prussia, his home land, 
Schulz was bent upon showing what he could do. He 
could not bear the thought that Germany had lost the 
record for duration flying, and so he flew for eight hours 
forty-two minutes and nine seconds in his old " Broom- 
stick," thus breaking Maneyrol's world record. But the 
important factor of his feat was his demonstration of 
the possibility of great achievements with the very simplest 
resources.
His victory was not attained without a struggle, for he 
had formidable rivals in Martens, Hackmack, and Spiess, 
all of whom flew machines that were recognized as the best 
of their kind.
Once when Martens had flown over six miles he was 
compelled to descend in order to avoid crossing the 
Lithuanian frontier and thus creating official complications.
At this Rossitten Meeting experiments were also carried 
out with soaring planes provided with small auxiliary 
engines. Martens mounted a light engine, of five h.p. 
on his " Max/' which proved sufficiently powerful to 
sustain the machine in an horizontal flight.
Still more notable was Budig's experimental plane, a 
small biplane on which various novelties were tried out. 
For example, Budig attempted to 
obtain automatic 
stability by utilizing the pressure on the wings (which varies 
with differing flight conditions) to create stabilizing 
surfaces. Budig employed engines of various h.p.'s, and 
though his flights were short, they were particularly

--- PAGE 104 ---
THE LEAN YEARS 
73
interesting on account of the accurate scientific investi- 
gations he always made when engaged on them.
The development of light flying machines with the lowest 
possible auxiliary engine power was made a special feature 
of the 1924 Rhon Meeting.
The shortest course for soaring planes in this competition 
was fixed at fifteen miles, with a minimum height of eleven 
hundred and fifty feet.
Comparatively few new types of machines were seen this 
year. Martens brought with him six machines ; Espenlaub 
was there with an improved machine of his own con- 
struction, while naturally the successful planes of the previous 
year reappeared. Two machines of a new type are worthy 
of special mention, because they represented an attempt 
to obtain better facilities for flights in gusty weather by 
variable wing curvatures. One of these planes, which was 
constructed by Herr von Schertel, did nothing of note, 
but the other, the " Roemryke-Berge," won the second 
prize for distance flight ; this was the machine in which 
Nehring made his wonderful record flight years later.
The achievements at this meeting were, however, so poor 
that even the most incorrigible optimists began to doubt 
the possibilities of further development in soaring, but it 
is only fair to mention the fact that out of the twenty-eight 
days of its duration twenty-five were foggy or rainy. There 
were no feats comparable with those of the previous years, 
the longest flight being the seven miles covered by Fuchs 
in the Darmstadt " Konsul," while in the " Alte Dessauer," 
the same pilot attained the greatest height of six hundred 
and sixty feet above the starting point.
The engine-driven machines did better. Udet, the 
celebrated stunting and war pilot, brought a splendid 
machine, the " Colibri " (Humming Bird), in which he made 
a beautiful cross-country flight, gained a prize for height, and 
finally succeeded in screwing up the duration record 
for machines with light engines to four hours and thirty- 
nine minutes. A very interesting machine was Baumer's 
" Roter Vogel" (Red Bird), which was, in fact, an " engined" 
soaring plane that could soar equally well with or without 
its motor power.

--- PAGE 105 ---
74 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
All these experiments with motor planes only served, 
however, to show that the Rhon was not the right sphere 
of activity for them, and they were, therefore, eliminated 
from the competitions of following years. Flyers were 
far from satisfied with the results of this Rhon meeting.
It was thus quite natural that German pilots should look 
forward enthusiastically to the Italian Flying Meeting in 
the September of the same year, when they hoped to do 
some better flying than had been possible under the wretched 
weather conditions of the 1924 Rhon Meeting. But there 
further disappointments awaited them.
German soarers had been invited to this competition by 
the Italian National Air League, and a picked team set out 
under the leadership of Oskar Ursinus. They found that 
the starting place was on a mountain more than four 
thousand feet high, among shell holes and trenches of the 
former war zone. The first to start was Martens, who 
found it impossible to carry out anything but a gliding 
flight, and later the difficult starting and landing conditions 
led to many accidents. On one occasion the " Konsul" 
barely escaped a fatal crash after grazing a high tension 
wire with its wings. Martens smashed his two-seater 
" Deutschland " (Germany), while his record distance flight 
ended in a crashed landing. The Germans were not too well 
satisfied with this last achievement, in spite of the acclama- 
tions which it earned, as it was, strictly speaking, not a true 
soaring flight but rather an extremely skilful utilization 
of the enormous difference in height between the elevated 
starting point on the mountain and the valley below. The 
longest flight was thirteen miles.
At this period the interest in soaring flight began to 
fall off, as adherents of any cause invariably become luke- 
warm when they have no progress to point to and no new 
records to fire them. Consequently the pilots were not 
particularly hopeful about 1925, and their despondency 
proved to be fully justified, as the year had no special 
achievements to show. Its brightest and most important 
feature in connection with the future of soaring flight was, 
however, the appearance of new and young pilots. The 
Darmstadt student, Nehring, made his record flight of

--- PAGE 106 ---
^ ?%Vif o ItiJV .J

--- PAGE 107 ---
IS. 
A KISSIAX SOARKR ON Tin: Hnox IN THE 192.") MI:I:TIXG. 
IT is NOT GKXKRALLY KNOWN THAT 
TIIK SOAKING FLIGHT MOVKMKXT is KXTRKMKLY TOPTLAR IN HTSSIA, WIIKHK TIIK CIIIKF C'KXTRI: OF
ACTIVITY is ix Tin: CRIMEA

--- PAGE 108 ---
THE LEAN YEARS 
75
thirteen miles, while his friend and fellow student, Hessel- 
bach, broke the two-seater record with a flight of three 
hours five minutes and fifty-five seconds.
The only interesting soaring planes at this uneventful 
meeting were those of the Russians, who took part in a 
Rhon competition for the first time.
Following the example of Germany, Russia had held the 
first All-Russian Soaring Meeting in 1923. 
Russia contains 
much good flying terrain, and an excellent site had been 
chosen for this first meeting after a long and thorough 
search, in the course of which practically the whole land was 
explored. This was a stretch of land in the Crimean 
Mountains where, as the Russians said, the wind streamed 
up as though from an oven. Very few machines appeared, 
but much experience was gathered from the results of the 
meeting, and many technical faults were overcome. The 
steering surfaces of most of the machines were too small 
and had to be enlarged during the meeting, but on November 
5th Jungmeister made a distance flight of one thousand 
seven hundred yards, and ten days later achieved a soaring 
flight in which he reached a height of three hundred and 
thirty feet. The following day this indefatigable flyer 
started again and flew for one hour two minutes and 
thirty seconds. There were several technical novelties, 
the most interesting being the parabolic plane which con- 
sisted of one vast parabolic surface.
And now the hard-working Russians were with us in 
the Rhon, and vied with the pick of the Germans in sporting 
spirit and flying enthusiasm. The way in which they 
" torpedoed " their planes untiringly, one after another, 
into the air was exemplary. They set a sharp pace. They 
even flew on foggy days when they could barely distinguish 
the outlines of the slope.
There was still much interest in the development of 
an aeroplane with an engine of low power that would be 
capable of soaring by its own unaided efforts. The " Karl 
der Grosse (Carl the Great), belonging to the Darmstadt 
Academic Flying Group, fulfilled these conditions so satis- 
factorily that the press devoted much space to descriptions 
of this new " Magic Flying Machine/' in which the pilot

--- PAGE 109 ---
76 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
could fly with or without motor power at will. One of the 
best among the pilots who flew this plane was young Peter 
Hesselbach, who passed his Soaring Flight tests at this 
meeting in company with his fellow-student, Laubenthal. 
But no one then imagined that these were the men destined 
to demonstrate our soaring flying to the Americans at 
Cape Cod.
But in comparison with the previous years external 
triumphs were few, and much thought was given to the 
problem of how it might be possible to re-invigorate the 
movement. It was recognized that sportsmanship had 
brought us thus far, but other factors were needed for 
further progress. Up to 1924 new constructive work had 
been done, even though its inspiration dated back to the 
stimulus of the first meeting, but in 1925 no novelties 
appeared. There were not sufficient new pilots ; no new 
methods of soaring were discovered ; no new machines 
were brought forward.
In order to remove the first of these disabilities the 
Rhon-Rossitten Gesellschaft, which was founded in that 
year, acquired Martens' Flying School on the Wasserkuppe. 
The Institution for Research work which formed part of 
the school, and which possessed departments for the 
study of the technique of flight, aerodynamics and meteor- 
ology, was henceforth to devote itself to genuine scientific 
work in the field of soaring flight in addition to its original 
task of discovering new methods of soaring. In the follow- 
ing spring the new school at Rossitten was opened, and 
thus was established the predominance of the Rhon- 
Rossitten Gesellschaft in all matters connected with 
soaring flight.
The Rossitten meetings had always provided close- 
fought contests, and in 1925 a galaxy of soaring flyers 
entered. The best Rhon flights were not equalled, but 
Martens did some excellent work, including a distance 
flight of nearly nine miles. It must be borne in mind that 
in the Rhon a long flight of this nature can be accomplished 
purely and simply by a skilful glide from the Wasserkuppe 
down into the valley. In Rossitten, on the other hand, 
continuous soaring is needed if a flight of any distance is

--- PAGE 110 ---
THE LEAN YEARS 
77
to be carried out. 
A new feature of this Rossitten meeting 
was the successful night flying of Schulz, Martens, and the 
Darmstadt group.
The French meeting in Vauville, which took place almost 
simultaneously with the Rhon competitions, afforded a 
splendid proof of the enthusiasm and skill of the French 
and Belgian devotees of the new sport. That year they were 
favoured with excellent weather. The Belgians broke 
Schulz's record of the previous year twice, Major Massaux 
remaining in the air for ten hours and nineteen minutes, and 
Lieutenant Demblon for ten hours. 
The Frenchman 
Auger climbed before a thunderstorm to a height of two 
thousand three hundred and seventy-six feet, but his flight 
could not be recognized as a record because he had not 
complied exactly with the rules governing the registration 
of records. It was, nevertheless, a splendid feat. At that 
time, however, flyers had no clear knowledge how they 
might best utilize the energies of the thunderstorm, and 
several years were to elapse before they acquired it.
On the whole that year's French meeting was most 
successful, although it was somewhat clouded by the fatal 
accident to the Belgian pilot, Simonet.
The German flyers were invited to an autumn meeting 
in the Crimea and warmly welcomed the opportunity to 
show what they could do, the more so as their home results 
for the year had been so mediocre.
The Russians who were with us in the Rhon had much 
to say about their splendid flying region, and we found that 
their enthusiasm was fully justified. Excellent upwind was 
supplied by a mountain ridge three miles in length, with 
slopes of from five hundred to six hundred and fifty feet 
high. At his first attempt Schulz flew five hours and 
fifty-one minutes, but thenext day the Russian, Jakobtschuk, 
achieved a flight of nine hours and a half. This spurred 
on " Uncle Ferdinand," who arrived at the starting place 
early in the morning of the following day armed with three 
sandwiches, a pocket lamp and his native obstinacy, and 
brought off a characteristic flight of twelve hours six 
minutes twenty-five seconds, of which over an hour was 
flown after night. In the course of this flight he also

--- PAGE 111 ---
78 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
established a height record of one thousand three hundred 
and forty feet. Then, inspired by the Master's example, 
young Nehring, who had already distinguished himself in 
the Rhon, started in his " Konsul " on one of those distance 
flights for which he had shown great aptitude, and on this 
occasion his performance was truly masterful. For the 
first time he worked his way systematically from hillside 
to hillside, making the most of every foot of height and 
planning out his course carefully with regard to the lie of 
the land. A distance flight of twelve and a half miles was 
the result, but the most noteworthy feature was the fact 
that the landing place was higher than the starting point. 
Nehring had made the first long distance flight in which 
height was not lost.
A great storm brought the Russian meeting to a premature 
end. More than thirty Russian planes and seven German 
ones were housed in tents pitched at some distance from 
the place where the competitors were accommodated. The 
tents were guarded at night by a few Russians, but one night 
towards the end of the meeting a whirlwind tore across the 
country. Its onslaught was so sudden that it was impossible 
for the watchers to summon help, and when the pilots went 
out next morning to investigate the damage they found the 
camp a mass of ruins. All the Russian tents and machines 
were destroyed, but the German tent still stood erect, with 
all its planes intact! With inimitable good comradeship 
the Russian sentinels had devoted their energies to the 
preservation of their guests' property.

--- PAGE 112 ---
ON THE WAY TO SCIENTIFIC FLYING
I
N soaring flight circles, 1925 is often termed the year 
of crisis. It is noteworthy that in nearly every land 
where gliding and soaring flight was taken up, the 
interest in the new sport rose rapidly and fell again with 
equal rapidity. For example, no permanent results were 
achieved by the successful English meeting ; in France, 
too, the movement soon came to a standstill, while in 
Germany things were hardly better. Then came science 
and helped us over the dead point.
Early in 1926 Professor Georgii was called to the Chair 
of Flight Meteorology at the Technical College in Darm- 
stadt, where he entered upon his duties on May ist of that 
year. At the same time he was nominated director of the 
Research Institute of the Rhon-Rossitten Gesellschaft. His 
appointment to these two offices brought about a close 
connection between the practical work of the company and 
the academic studies of the College, with the result that 
the Research Institute on the Rhon became the workshop 
of many young students who devoted their holidays to 
flying and other kindred sciences.
Science helped soaring, and soaring helped science. 
This, of course, had always been the case to a certain 
extent, but the twofold appointment, coming as it did just 
at that time of depression and of crisis, proved to be of 
decisive importance. In Professor Georgii German soar- 
ing flight found a scientific leader who was capable of 
helping it over many difficult moments.
The previous year's results had shown that the movement 
suffered from lack of concentration. For this reason the 
coastal Flying Meeting at Rossitten was reluctantly 
abandoned, while the time allotted to competitive flying in 
the Rhon was severely curtailed. The prize money was 
likewise concentrated on fewer events.
A complete novelty was introduced in the form of
79

--- PAGE 113 ---
8o 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
experimental competitions with the aim of stimulating 
constructive creativeness and developing technical pro- 
gress. 
Some time before these competitions opened, 
announcements appeared in the technical journals, calling 
on all persons who believed that they could contribute 
to the development of flying by bringing forward new ideas 
and problems to submit their suggestions to a special 
Research Committee. Among the mass of chaff received, 
most of which consisted of idle fantasies resting upon no 
practical foundation, were found a few valuable grains 
capable of being used as the seeds of future development. 
The Darmstadt Group's " Hessen," a plane which had 
not been sufficiently tested in the preceding year, attracted 
great attention by reason of its variable wing curvatures, 
which its inventors claimed as factors that would enable 
it to fly at both faster and slower speeds than had hitherto 
been deemed possible.
The indefatigable Espenlaub appeared with a plane 
furnished with a span of nearly eighty feet, which unfor- 
tunately did not fulfil the expectations of its creator owing 
to aerodynamically faulty designing. There were also 
two experimental planes which could beat the air with 
their wings and an interesting model of a helicopter.
In any case the entries for this new prize showed us 
that a valuable stimulus might be given to technical 
research by such a competition.
The sporting side of the meeting was also a great success. 
The young flyers went industriously to work ; the old 
brigade " kept its end up."
A noteworthy feature of that year was the way in which the 
pilots contrived to render themselves comparatively in- 
dependent of the weather, and still more worthy of special 
attention was the masterly flying technique which Nehring 
now displayed for the first time, which can only be 
described as truly scientific. Kegel's somewhat uninten- 
tional utilization of the energy derived from the movements 
of free air was another phenomenon of an interesting nature.
It was Ferdinand Schulz who initiated the practice of 
starting out in atrocious weather and incited the others to 
fly even in rain and hail. But far more important were the

--- PAGE 114 ---
flights suggested by Professor Georgii and carried out by 
Nehring ; these were carried out in quite light breezes 
by the aid of currents engendered purely by heat. When 
Professor Georgii urged on the flyers the necessity of 
endeavouring to fly on windless days, deriving their motive 
power solely from the warm air rising from the valley, most 
of them refused. " It will only mean," they said, " flying 
down into the valley and then having to transport the 
plane back all that way up the mountain." Nehring alone 
made the attempt, but with wind velocities of only three or 
four feet per second he contrived to attain to a height of 
three hundred and thirty-three feet above his starting place.
Nehring revealed himself as a true master by his flight 
to Milseburg and back. When he had reached the moun- 
tain which was selected as the goal (at a distance of about three 
and a half miles from his starting point) he began to lose 
height rapidly. After careful consideration he flew to a 
slope above a gorge in which the wind was driven upwards 
as if in a shaft. Here he succeeded in regaining his lost 
elevation, but nevertheless afterwards dropped to some 
four hundred feet below the starting point. The spectators 
who were watching from the Wasserkuppe were convinced 
that he could not recover his lost height, but by skilfully 
making the best of his situation he succeeded in doing the 
impossible and climbed so far that he actually contrived to 
land at an elevation higher than that allowed him by the 
conditions of the flight. On this occasion Nehring 
demonstrated in wonderful fashion the true significance of 
slope soaring, for he did not call upon chance to aid him 
but made a carefully calculated plan in accordance with the 
prevailing wind and land conditions.
Fundamentally different, though also most interesting, 
was Max Kegel's distance flight. On August 12th he war 
surprised in the air by a thunderstorm which had gathered 
with unusual suddeness. Landing was impossible ; for 
a moment he disappeared into the clouds. He had no 
clear conception of the meteorological processes which lead 
to a thunderstorm, such as the cold air which inserts itself 
under warm air, thus flinging it up into a " thunderstorm 
front " and forming a roller of clouds from which issue

--- PAGE 115 ---
82 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
lightning and rain. To take advantage of the storm, the 
pilot must fly along the front of this roller ; Kegel did not 
contrive to do this, but he was flung so high by the strong 
upwind that when he had happily escaped from the clouds 
he was able to make a long gliding flight of over thirty 
miles. 
As he had no barograph with him, he could not 
determine accurately the highest point he reached, but it 
must have been at least two thousand three hundred feet 
higher than his start.
Kegel's description of his terrific struggle with the storm 
was so eloquent that everyone was strongly dissuaded from 
imitating his example, and in the following year flying 
experts pointed out that it was most inadvisable to attempt 
thunderstorm flying.
1926 was again a year of records. The flights of Nehring 
and Kegel had convinced many sceptics that good soaring 
demands a profound knowledge of air currents and their 
laws and that we still possessed all too little of this know- 
ledge. An acute observer must have sensed the dawn of 
a new era in soaring.
With his usual tenacity Ferdinand Schulz refused to 
let 1925 pass without the accomplishment of some special 
feat in his homeland. On June 3rd, some time before the 
opening of the Rhon Meeting, he created a world record 
for two-seaters by remaining in the air above the sand dunes 
of Rossitten for nine and a half hours with a passenger. 
This fine flight must certainly have helped to prevent 
interest in Rossitten from dying out, and the Rossitten 
Meeting in the spring of 1927 showed how important it 
was that it should be kept alive.
Max Kegel had added an engine to his thunderstorm 
machine, and hummed about the district in his new- 
fangled nine h.p. aeroplane, thus wiling away some dull 
hours ; not that there were really many of those during 
that meeting. 
Coast land is and will always remain the 
best territory for duration flights on account of the steady 
winds and areas of strong upwind. Ferdinand Schulz 
was naturally once more to the fore in these achievements ; 
on May 3rd he made a flight of fourteen hours and seven 
minutes in his " Ostpreussen " (East Prussia). Nehring and

--- PAGE 116 ---
19. THE FAMOUS AIRCRAFT DESKJXEK, FOKKEK (LEFT), WHO WAS 
ONE OF THE MOST EXTII l"SI ASTIC DISCIPLIF.S OF SoAKIXG FLKJIIT,
AT A HIIOX MEETING;
20. SOLDEXHOFF'S TAILLESS MOTOK-PLAXE. 
BUILT AND FLOWN BY
KsPEXLAlB. THE WELL-KXOWX SoAKIXC FLYER
Facing page S'l

--- PAGE 117 ---
Tin: \YASSKRKUI-PE DURING TIII: !!):><> COMPETITION

--- PAGE 118 ---
ON THE WAY TO SCIENTIFIC FLYING 83
Reidenbach flew together in the two-seater " Margarete " 
for five hours and fifty-five minutes.
Far more interesting, however, were the distance flights, 
which were specially remarkable feats because the sea dunes 
over which they were made seldom rise to a greater height 
than thirty-three feet. Schulz worked his way along these 
insignificant hillocks and succeeded in reaching Memel, 
which lies somewhat over thirty-six miles away. Often 
his wing slid along a hair's breadth above the dune when he 
was trying to utilize some solitary gust to gain height, 
while his method of bridging gaps between the slopes which 
he had to cross was simply masterful. The upwind area 
is often so narrow that it is difficult to keep aloft a machine 
of any considerable span, and frequently he had to fly over 
the heavy Baltic surf, where there was no possibility of 
landing. His sporting spirit and marvellous skill over- 
came all difficulties.
It was almost even more amazing to watch Schulz rise 
to a height of over one thousand six hundred and fifty feet 
above the dunes. In the Rhon Hentzen's 1922 height 
record had not yet been surpassed, but here, on these low 
slopes where it was least to be expected, such a height had 
been attained.
Young Nehring did not hesitate to attempt to rival the 
older master's feats in this territory that was unfamiliar 
to him. As usual, his sporting feats were enhanced in value 
by the interesting observations he made. He pushed out to 
sea for a distance of three hundred and thirty feet and 
established the fact that very heavy surf causes upwind, 
but his greatest feat was a flight over the seaside resort of 
Cranz. There is a gap in the dunes a mile and a half 
long, this flat area being occupied only by low trees, 
strand pavilions and hotel buildings. But Nehring was 
not deterred, for he found out that even the houses and 
trees could supply him with sufficient upwind, and, as a 
matter of fact, he attained his greatest height directly over 
the people who were strolling on the beach below.
Science has given us the explanation of these remarkable 
phenomena. In such cases the upwind is not produced 
by the objects in question but by the check such houses

--- PAGE 119 ---
84 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
and trees give to the air currents streaming in from across 
the sea.^ Eddies are formed, over which the aircurrent 
must climb, and|in it the flyer soars.
Thus Rossitten also^demonstrated the value of the union 
of practical and theoretical work and pointed out many new 
paths. But if the possibilities of the Rossitten country 
were most fully exploited by Ferdinand Schulz, Johannes 
Nehring had now become the master of the mountainous 
Rhon, and in the eighth Rhon soaring competition he showed 
us what he could do.
The meeting was once more a great success, as is proved 
by the fact that competitions took place for all the prizes 
that were offered. To promote the new developments, 
prizes were offered for proficiency shown by pupils, for 
the best courses of training and for all-round achievements. 
The first was to serve the purpose of attracting a succession 
of younger gliders ; the second was to ensure good training 
of the " C " pilots, that is to say flyers who have passed 
their final Gliding and Soaring Flight Examination, while 
the Achievement Competition was intended to encourage 
the most efficient forms of flying, to create new flying 
possibilities and to stimulate " Record " pilots to surpass 
their previous feats.
The desired results were obtained. Although Nehring's 
distance flight was shorter than some flights of the 
previous year, such as those of Schulz (in Rossitten) and 
Kegel, it proved their equal as a fine piece of flying. When 
judging distance flight it is always necessary to take into 
account how and under what circumstances they are 
carried out. Starting from the Wasserkuppe, Nehring 
flew a good thirty miles as the crow flies, but they were 
forcibly wrested from the slopes in the most literal sense 
of the word. There was no thunderstorm to bear him on 
high, no coast land with its even contours ; he was constantly 
seeking out new fields of upwind, struggling against 
downwind, thinking, calculating ; 
in short he made a 
masterful flight. His barograph shows clearly how con- 
tinuous was his struggle to maintain the necessary height. 
Still more masterful was the way in which Nehring won 
the prize offered for a goal flight to the Heidelstein and back.

--- PAGE 120 ---
ON THE WAY TO SCIENTIFIC FLYING 85
The distance from the starting place to the goal was nearly 
five miles, and the hillsides along which he had to fly there 
and back are most unfavourable. It is therefore not 
possible to carry out this flight by ordinary methods. But 
Nehring did not hesitate for a moment ; 
after cool 
calculation he flew some distance beyond the goal, sought 
out a slope which did not lie directly in his course but which 
had good upwind and lingered there until he had gained 
sufficient height to fly gracefully back in a long curve right 
round the Heidelstein. Once on the return flight it 
seemed as if he must drop down to earth, but again he 
looked for a favourable slope and landed not far below the 
starting point, thus displaying extraordinary air-sense in the 
way in which he coped with the prevailing conditions.
Kegel, too, had a very fine flight to his credit. 
At that 
time the state of the German soaring movement was such 
that its friends were constantly on the lookout for new 
methods of preventing it from coming to a standstill. 
A goal flight was therefore announced when the wind was 
blowing in a direction which had hitherto rendered long 
flights impossible. Following the example set by Nehring 
in the previous year, Kegel utilized the prevailing conditions 
to the fullest extent and carried off the prize.
One special feature of that year's flying was the immense 
gulf that separated the masters from the younger men 
who aspired to be their successors. Apart from Nehring, 
Schulz, and Kegel, no one showing great ability was to be 
seen, all the other pilots falling far below the standard of 
these three. The Munich youth, Thoenes, attempted 
the Heidelstein flight in his " Miinchner Kindl," and reached 
the goal without much difficulty, but on the return journey 
he crashed on rocky ground and was indeed fortunate to 
escape without injury.
Nevertheless the general results of that year's meeting 
were very satisfactory. Sixty-eight planes had appeared 
(a sure sign of interest) and five hundred and fifty flights 
were made twice as many as in the previous year. But 
now the criticism which is always helpful to progress began 
to appear. What was to be the next step ? 
Nehring's 
slope soaring had pointed out many new possibilities which

--- PAGE 121 ---
86 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
were assuredly open to further development. He knew 
his flying area well, and it was to be presumed that skilful 
handling of his machine would enable him to add on a few 
extra miles but only a few. The Rhon district had 
already been thoroughly flown in all directions along lines 
radiating from the Wasserkuppe as a centre, down almost 
to the plain where a wide landscape without hill or mountain 
stretched to the far horizon. Not much more was to be 
expected from slope soaring, and consequently the coming 
year was looked forward to with much interest and some 
anxiety.
But before the flyers met again in the Rhon, new and 
exciting developments took place in the spring of 1928. 
Two expeditions from Germany to foreign lands were 
organized and carried out.
America, the land in which motor flying had been devel- 
oped from the gliding and soaring experiments of the brothers 
Wright, seemed almost to have forgotten their work during 
the period in which engine-driven flight had made its way 
so rapidly, but there were some Americans who still 
followed with interest the progress of soaring in Europe. 
They desired to see young America waken up to the 
interesting possibilities of soaring sport, and a German- 
American, Mr. Frohlich, of the North German Lloyd, was 
eager to arrange for a visit of German soarers to America. 
The American Motorless Aviation Club was founded and 
three German soaring pilots were invited to visit America 
and give practical demonstrations of gliding and soaring. 
The leader of the expedition was Captain Rohre, the 
Director of the Rossitten Gliding and Soaring School, and 
with him went two members of the Darmstadt Academic 
Flying Group, Peter Hesselbach and Laubenthal. They 
took with them the " Darmstadt/' the fine machine in 
which Nehring had made his best flights, which was now 
destined to show its capabilities in the hand of a skilful 
pilot on the other side of the ocean. But first of all the 
expedition had a long search through the vast land for a 
place suitable for their demonstrations. This was found 
at last at Cape Cod ; there were still many difficulties to 
overcome, but finally, on July 26th, the first good soaring

--- PAGE 122 ---
22. 
NEHRING, 
A VERITABLE MASTER IN THE ART OF SLOPE- 
SOAKING. HE CRASHED TO HIS DEATH IN A MOTOR-PLANE IN 1930
Facing page 86

--- PAGE 123 ---
23. THE DARMSTADT ACADEMIC FLYING GROUP'S D.I8. FUSELAGE
AND WlNGS SHOW THE EFFECT OF THE EXPERIENCE GAINED IN
SOARING FLIGHT
24. THE DARMSTADT ACADEMIC FLYING GROUP'S "MOHAMED," A 
TYPICAL DESCENDANT OF TIIE SOARING PLANE FITTED WITH A
LIGHT ENGINE
Facing page 87

--- PAGE 124 ---
ON THE WAY TO SCIENTIFIC FLYING 87
flight was made. 
It lasted for fifty-eight minutes and 
enabled Peter Hesselbach to break Wright's old record.
And now this great country, which is always so enthusi- 
astic for sporting feats, began to bestir itself. When, three 
days later, the young pilot from Darmstadt broke his own 
record with a flight of four hours and nine minutes, his 
achievement was welcomed with acclamation. But records 
were not the sole aims and objects of the expedition ; the 
most important problem was how best to pass on to others 
the accumulated experience obtained at home, that might 
save them from going astray on many wrong paths at the 
beginning. Through much mutual understanding and 
camaraderie there grew up that German-American co- 
operation which was to bear such good fruit later and which 
had left as its memorial the Cape Cod Flying School.
In this spring France also announced another great inter- 
national flying meeting. The two Frenchmen, Auger and 
Abrial, had been in the Rhon in 1927, where both had been 
popular. Abrial's sportsmanship and tranquil, helpful 
temperament had especially endeared him to his German 
colleagues. These two procured an invitation to the 
German pilots to take part in the competitions.
The meeting took place on the old, familiar slopes of 
Vauville. The conditions there, especially as regards wind 
and weather, are very similar to those at Rossitten, with 
the additional advantage of a vast drop of five hundred 
feet towards the sea which supplies splendid upwind, 
but one serious drawback was the difficulty of finding good 
landing places on a coast where the surf breaks directly 
upon the cliffs of the different capes.
Five German planes arrived, but only two French ones. 
AbriaPs " Vautour," piloted by Auger, was too heavy for 
the light winds which prevailed during the competition, 
while the " Hirondelle," which was piloted by its designer 
and constructor, Savoya, reminded us of many failures which 
appeared in the Rhon in 1920. It was entirely unsuitable 
for competitive flying, so that the meeting resolved itself 
into a German competition under French management.
The greatest height was reached by Hirth in the " Wiirt- 
temberg," designed by Laubenthal. The chief interest }

--- PAGE 125 ---
[KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
however, centred, as usual, around the distance flying. 
Nehring, who was the first to fly for the distance prize, 
started in a wind with a velocity of twelve feet per second, 
rounded a difficult cape and landed after a flight of fifteen 
miles, a daring exploit in view of the light breeze and the 
unfamiliar territory. In his next attempt he did not succeed 
in rounding the rocks of the cape and had to make a 
forced landing on rough ground where a crash was inevitable. 
Hirth had learned much from these flights ; realizing that 
the wind was held up within the bay and that the true 
upwind began to rise from the water far out at sea in order 
to pass over the aerial dam, he endeavoured to escape 
Nehring's bad luck by flying right out to sea. He rounded 
the dangerous point in splendid style close above the spray 
of the surf. After negotiating a difficult cape, he finally 
landed on the beach of a seaside resort more than seventeen 
and a half miles from his starting point. This feat should 
not be undervalued, as it calls for more pluck on the pilot's 
part to experiment with a new course over the sea where 
failure means a descent into the waves than it does when 
he is flying above solid ground where he can always find 
a landing place in an emergency. To attempt the former 
expedient a man must have immense faith in his theory.
There was no one who did not rejoice in the victory 
of this comrade who was so universally beloved. Wolf 
Hirth, one of the pioneers in the early days of the Wasser- 
kuppe, is unsurpassed in his devotion to soaring ; in spite 
of several bad crashes which kept him in hospital for long 
periods he returned again and again to his favourite sport ; 
not even the loss of a leg in a motor-cycle accident deterred 
him from flying, and such is his tenacity that the greater 
number of his successes have been gained since his 
disablement.
During this French meeting the other machines also did 
good flying under the guidance of their expert pilots. 
KegePs plane, in particular, made many fine flights, and it 
is hard to say whether the Germans had more pleasure in 
their successes or in the exceedingly hearty welcome and 
co-operation that they found in a foreign land.
In the meantime matters were by no means at a stand-

--- PAGE 126 ---
ON THE WAY TO SCIENTIFIC FLYING
still on the Wasserkuppe. The staff of the Technical 
Department of the Research Institute had been working 
indefatigably for years, and undoubtedly their most 
interesting experiments were those made with new machines 
of the tailless types and the " Duck." It is known only 
to the few initiated that the first experiments with a new 
propulsion force for aeroplanes, i.e. the rocket, were made 
with soaring planes. After numerous tests with models 
propelled in this fashion the experimenters proceeded to 
equip the " Duck " with a rocket apparatus. The few 
people in the secret had followed this experiment with 
lively interest, the more so as at one of the later trials a 
model attained a speed of three hundred miles an hour. 
It is obvious, of course, that these tests had to be conducted 
with the maximum of caution, but on June nth, 1928, 
Herr Stamer, the director of the Flying School of the Rhon- 
Rossitten Company's Research Institution, made a flight 
of eighty seconds in a rocket plane constructed by Alexander 
Lippisch, in the course of which he described a complete 
circle.
Hissing violently and emitting an immense volume of 
smoke, the plane shot forward without any difficulty, but 
at the second attempt matters did not progress so smoothly. 
The start was a good one, but a few seconds afterwards 
the rocket exploded with a report like that of a bursting 
shell. The nine pounds of explosives contained in its 
metal sheath were scattered far and wide, incidentally 
setting the plane on fire. Herr Stamer went into a dive 
to extricate himself from the flames, and landed in the nick 
of time with two large holes burnt in the back of his coat.
Thus ended the first attempts to pilot a machine propelled 
by a rocket. The experiments were carried on in all 
secrecy, so that the only modest record of Herr Stamer's 
wonderful feat is his " Rocket Coat/' which has been 
preserved in memory of the perilous day.

--- PAGE 127 ---
OUR EFFORTS REWARDED
A
^D now the days of the ninth Rhon Soaring Meeting 
draw nigh. The entries for all events exceeded 
those of any previous meeting a tribute to the grow- 
ing interest in soaring and whereas on previous occasions 
the outstanding feats were performed by a few experts, 
this time every prize was keenly contested. Above all, 
the younger generation began to make its presence felt.
The enthusiasm of these young folk was shown by the 
record number of entries. A hundred and five planes were 
entered, and nearly all of them appeared. The new and 
vigorous life infused into the soaring movement this year 
is best demonstrated by the fact that it witnessed the 
breaking of the Rhon duration and height records which 
had stood intact since 1922.
In the July of that year I was fortunate enough to break 
Hentzen's endurance record of three hours six minutes 
with a flight of three hours twenty minutes. His height 
record was surpassed no less than eleven times by several 
pilots.
Although, as I have previously remarked, duration 
flights as such can hardly be considered an important phase 
of expert flying, they are, as their name implies, excellent 
practice for all flyers. This time the contest for the 
endurance prize was fought out with the utmost obstinacy ; 
on August Qth Pomnitz broke my Rhon record with a 
flight of four hours seven minutes, only to be vanquished 
on the same day by Dittmar, who flew for four hours twenty- 
two minutes. 
Finally, on one of the last days of the 
meeting, I succeeded in recapturing the record with a flight 
of seven hours fifty-four minutes.
As it had not been possible to calculate the exact height 
reached by Kegel in his thunderstorm flight of 1926, the 
old 1922 one still stood. It was no mere matter of chance 
that 1928 saw it broken.
90

--- PAGE 128 ---
OUR EFFORTS REWARDED 
91
The most important novelty in this competition was the 
systematic utilization of what is known as cloud upwind, 
i.e. the air currents rising under cumuli. As I was instru- 
mental in developing its technique, I think it will not be 
out of place if I take up the tale and give my readers a 
direct account of my experiences.
In the spring of that same year the upwind under cumuli 
had been the subject of experiments carried on by the 
Research Institution of the Rhon-Rossitten Gesellschaft 
above the flying ground in Darmstadt. Professor Georgii 
reported to me that Nehring had succeeded in keeping 
up close under clouds for a considerable time without loss 
of height when flying a light-engined aeroplane. He had 
even contrived to do so with his engine shut off a feat 
which promptly roused in me the desire to try the same 
experiment with a soaring plane.
On the day of the first big Cloud Flying event I went 
up without any special ideas about cloud flying but with a 
hope of breaking the duration record. But duration 
flying is such monotonous work that the pilot must always 
look out for something to distract his mind if he is to keep 
awake, and this time I concentrated my attention on the 
fact that my plane climbed every time a cloud drifted over 
the summit ; when, therefore, I saw a gigantic one drawing 
near, I resolved to try to gain contact with it. Even then 
I realized that the chief difficulty in cloud flying was that 
of obtaining contact at the right moment. But my very 
first attempt was a success, and soon I found myself nearly 
one thousand four hundred feet above the starting place, 
travelling with the cloud. At first I flew on purely on 
account of my interest in the new phenomenon, but at 
last I began to wonder, while still circling under my cloud, 
whether the aid of this new method of soaring would 
enable me to fly round the Himmeldank Mountain. Now 
with the wind in the direction in which it then was I could 
have reached this mountain, but I could not have managed 
to fly back from it by our usual methods of slope soaring. 
I therefore pushed away from the cloud just as it drifted 
obliquely past this goal, dropped down to the hillside and 
maintained myself in the upwind there for a long time

--- PAGE 129 ---
92 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
Although many of the spectators on the Wasserkuppe could 
not make out what I was trying to do, I had already began 
to hope for great things from my new experiences.
And so I hung above a slope on the Himmelbank 
Mountain, patiently oscillating like a pendulum, while a 
cloud which I had noticed far away a little while before 
drew slowly nearer and nearer. 
I thought that I could 
only succeed in flying back to the Wasserkuppe by the same 
means which had enabled me to perform the outward 
journey, but I was beginning to feel by no means too sure 
of my theories. Then Max Kegel (" Thunderstorm 
Max ") started from the Wasserkuppe and soon joined me 
over the Himmeldank Mountain, but as I had already 
been pottering about there for quite a long time, his height 
was greater than mine and he turned at once in order to get 
back before me. That was a critical moment ; I was 
fully convinced that the Wasserkuppe could only be reached 
in this wind by the help of the clouds, but none the less 
it needed great confidence in my new theory to refrain 
from turning and hastening to join Kegel on the return 
flight. I became, however, more content to remain where 
I was when I saw that he was gradually losing height. 
At last he encountered the downwind of the Wasserkuppe 
and was compelled to land deep down in the valley and 
far away from the starting place.
In the meantime my new cloud had drawn so near that 
I expected every moment to feel its upwind. Suddenly 
I was in it, just as I had been in that of the other cloud 
when I started from the Wasserkuppe. All at once the 
plane rose rapidly, so that in a very short time I found 
myself again under the base of the cloud. It was evident 
that I had grasped instinctively the right way of getting 
into contact. To avoid forging too far ahead of a great 
cloud, you must keep on circling beneath it, and if you 
cannot manage to spring across to the next one, your speed 
will be exactly that of the prevailing wind velocity. Luckily 
I found for my return flight this time a continuous highroad 
of clouds stretching from the Himmeldankberg to the 
Wasserkuppe. Under this I proceeded in a straight line back 
to the starting place flying almost directly against the wind,

--- PAGE 130 ---
OUR EFFORTS REWARDED 
93
From time to time I turned out of my course in order to dis- 
cover where the most favourable upwind fields were to be 
found. I was so high above the mountain tops that there was 
no danger from the Wasserkuppe downwind ; consequently 
I attained my greatest height of one thousand seven hundred 
and eighty feet on the homeward journey, dropped down 
from it in a spiral glide and settled to a hair's breadth on 
the spot from which I had started.
I was received on the Wasserkuppe with cheers and 
congratulations, for just this last part of the flight had 
shown everyone the vast difference between Nehring's 
last year's distance flight and that which I had just con- 
cluded. Nehring had adopted his flight to the formation 
of the land in the most masterly way, while I had paid 
hardly any attention at all to it. This was the first step 
from the old method of flying from slope to slope to the new 
one of flying from cloud to cloud.
Not many of the flyers present realized at once what I 
had done ; only the few who had watched the flight closely 
had drawn conclusions which they proceeded to put into 
effect. Thus Bachem was the second to fly to the Himmel- 
dankberg and back, though he contented himself with attain- 
ing by the help of the clouds a height of two thousand one 
hundred and seventy-eight feet shortly after his start and 
then making use of this elevation for a gliding flight which 
carried him round the goal and back. He had no need 
to seek further assistance from the clouds on the return 
flight.
These flights undoubtedly laid the foundation for the 
development of cloud soaring, though the practice did not 
become general until the following year, when distance and 
height records were gained by its means, and its usefulness 
thus demonstrated.
Professor Georgii expressed himself on the significance 
of cloud flying for soaring flight as follows : " Kronfeld's 
is the credit of having been the first soaring flyer to make 
use of this upwind, which is entirely independent of the 
slope upwind which soarers have hitherto employed. On 
his flight to the Himmeldank Mountain he employed these 
new tactics so systematically and skilfully that the significance

--- PAGE 131 ---
94 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
of cloud flying immediately became so obvious to every 
soarer that during the further course of the competition 
all the pilots strove to gain contact with the clouds. The 
large number of high flights and notable distance flights 
made with help from the clouds before the end of the 
meeting proved that this contact was comparatively easy 
to attain and that splendid results might be expected from 
this new method of soaring. Undoubtedly cloud flying 
has placed soaring flight upon a completely new basis, 
which opens up further great possibilities for the future."
That same year I had a further opportunity to demonstrate 
another beneficial aspect of cloud flying. I was flying for 
the prize offered for the exploration of a district, and 
flew for twenty-four and a half miles through a stretch of 
land entirely unknown to flyers. My course led me for the 
most part above downwinds or over absolutely flat country 
where no upwind was to be expected ; the only way of 
crossing this gap was therefore to attach myself to a cloud 
and drift along with it. The second in this event was 
Ferdinand Schulz with a flight of twenty and a half miles, 
which he made by means of slope soaring. The conditions 
of this competition, I might say, demanded a minimum 
distance of fifteen miles, most of which was over country 
where no flyer had hitherto penetrated.
Although at this same meeting Dittmar achieved his 
Rhon height record of two thousand five hundred and 
seventy-five feet by the aid of cloud upwind without any 
clear comprehension of the phenomenon that had aided 
him, the duel between slope and cloud flying methods 
had apparently not yet been fought to a finish. Nehring's 
splendid distance flight, the longest hitherto made by any 
soaring plane, was evoked as proof of the superiority of 
slope flying by its supporters. Traversing the same 
terrain as in the previous year, he succeeded in adding 
twelve miles to his record, and thus established a new world 
record of forty-two and three-quarter miles. He also 
attained far greater heights over particular localities that 
year, which proved that he had increased his capacity to 
take advantage of the up winds of a given area. When he 
had left his last point of support in the mountains, the front

--- PAGE 132 ---
THE "HAPACE." A FRENCH SOAKER DESIGNED r>v ABRIALAND BUILT BY Louis I'EYHET,WIIO
ALSO TUKXED OUT THE MACHINE ON WHICH MANEYROL ACHIEVED HIS SUCCESSES
','4

--- PAGE 133 ---
20. 
TIIK " DrcK " 
The Property of the Rhon-Rossittcn (iesellsc-haft
27. 
A TAILLESS ROCKET MODEL TAKINC; OFF

--- PAGE 134 ---
OUR EFFORTS REWARDED 
95
of an approaching gale came to his aid, enabling him to fly 
over his landing place of the previous year at a height of 
six hundred and sixty feet and thus gain contact with another 
hillside. His journey over so large a tract of country by 
means of slope flying was undoubtedly a masterly display 
of expert air-sense, but unfortunately it was impossible 
to increase the distances flown by this method, in the Rhon 
district, at least. The Rhon mountains are surrounded by 
plains from which not even the smallest slope rises, so 
much the more must we appreciate Nehring's skill in taking 
advantage of the tiniest hillock.
This competition yielded great results for soaring flight. 
Moreover the young pilots who took part in the training 
competitions were most energetic, especially Krause, of 
Berlin, who put in an aggregate flying time of seven hours 
seventeen minutes fifty-eight seconds. But the greatest 
value, however, must be attached to the new methods of 
flying which were demonstrated for the first time, on account 
of the stimulus they gave to later special flying achievements. 
Taken as a whole, this competition may be fairly called a 
record one. The number of the competitors, planes and 
flights all exceeded the respective figures of the previous 
year, while the standard of efficiency was undoubtedly 
superior to that shown at any of the earlier meetings.
Then came autumn and winter, when soaring hibernated. 
Only in the Alps was soaring research still carried on.
Many starts had already been made from the edges of 
precipices, but nearly all of them took place in calm 
weather, while the higher peaks still remained virgin soil 
for soaring research. Udet, the celebrated stunting and 
war pilot, had made one flight from the summit of the 
Zugspitze (nine thousand seven hundred and seventy-eight 
feet), in the course of which he glided down into the valley 
below, but he was not able to do any soaring.
An expedition was arranged to the Rax Alp for the 
purpose of investigating the air current conditions, and 
the possibilities of soaring over steep slopes and precipices 
in the High Alps. As high mountains present special 
obstacles to the development of flying traffic, there is 
obviously a necessity for a careful investigation of the laws

--- PAGE 135 ---
96 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
which govern upwinds and downwinds and their intensities 
in those regions.
I was called upon to execute a number of flights under 
exceedingly difficult conditions. The first of these were 
three long gliding flights, the object of which was to 
ascertain the possibilities of flights from the edges of 
precipices in motorless machines and the limits of the 
advisable proximity to the precipice walls. Especially 
interesting was a flight in the " Priifling," in which I 
succeeded in flying right out over and away from the rock- 
wall in a dead calm and without any appreciable loss of 
height. As we cannot count upon warm currents in winter in 
the neighbourhood of even medium-sized mountains, this 
flight, which was only rendered possible by the help of a 
warm upwind, gave us valuable statistics concerning the 
prevailing intensities of upwind currents engendered by 
thermal conditions in the mountains. The first soaring 
flight in the High Alps, which took place in the course of 
this expedition, was something quite new in the annals of 
flying. It was carried out on February i2th, 1929, and 
lasted for half an hour in a wind velocity of fifty-one feet 
per second and a temperature of thirty degrees (centigrade) 
of cold, but we were able to land again on the plateau at 
the top of the precipice. This expedition proved the 
possibility of making such investigations in the high 
mountains by means of soaring ; it also brought back 
much information that proved to be of practical value to the 
pilots of engine-driven aeroplanes. Our observations of the 
formation of eddies were most interesting ; the strength 
of these eddies may be deduced from the fact that only 
a few weeks later a triple-engine traffic aeroplane with 
one thousand four hundred h.p. at its disposal dropped 
perpendicularly a good thousand feet when it encountered 
a downwind. The experience gained in soaring flight 
would enable soaring pilots to avoid such danger-spots.

--- PAGE 136 ---
THE FIRST SIXTY-MILE SOARING FLIGHT
F
EW forms of sport have risen in popular favour so 
rapidly as soaring. This is not surprising, however, 
when we consider its attractions for the younger 
generation, its accessibility to all and sundry, and its infinite 
variety, and manifold grades of achievement, beginning with 
the first little " hop " and culminating in the great record- 
making feats which often bear a significance that lifts 
them far beyond the limits of mere sporting affairs. It 
is therefore not surprising that the press has always displayed 
a great interest in soaring, and after the ninth Rhon Meeting 
the Grune Post, a well-known journal, offered a prize 
of £250 for the first pilot who should fly sixty miles in 
a motorless plane.
At first we pilots shook our heads thoughtfully at the 
mere idea of so long a flight and not a few impolite remarks 
were made about its promoters. But it was ever thus ; 
pilots grumble and then do what is asked of them.
Though the offer of this prize did not attract much 
public attention, all expert soaring flyers were immensely 
interested in it, and many trial flights were made. Ferdi- 
nand Schulz tried his luck over the dunes, Hirth and 
Laubenthal in their native mountains, and Kegel also 
made an attempt. From time to time we heard that 
somebody somewhere had started a flight for the new 
prize or crashed his machine while trying for it. Many 
waited with a patience born of despair for suitable weather 
for the record flight.
Schulz made one fine flight ; he remained in the air for 
four hours in the depth of winter but eventually had to give 
up on account of the difficulty of flying in driving snow. 
In the spring I made two flights from the Wasserkuppe in 
my new plane, the " Wien " (Vienna) which I had had built 
for me because I felt the necessity of acquiring a machine 
superior to any of the ones then in use, and in her trial
97 
H

--- PAGE 137 ---
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
flights she showed that she could do all that I expected 
of her. Once that spring I rose so high under a cloud 
that the height could no longer be registered by my 
barometer, which was only capable of recording up to six 
thousand six hundred feet. Another time I gained 
valuable experience of flying in bad weather on a flight in 
heavy snow squalls.
The competition for this prize became serious when 
Johannes Nehring set out on a long-distance flight from a 
locality in the Odenwald, not far from Darmstadt, on 
April 3rd, 1929. He flew along the whole mountain range 
to Heidelberg, a stretch which could be accomplished by 
slope soaring, and then encountered the great gap which 
separates the Odenwald from the Black Forest. After a 
flight lasting one hour and forty minutes in which he covered 
a distance of forty-two and a quarter miles he was com- 
pelled to land. The bridging over of such a difficult gap 
as the one which brought Nehring's flight to a premature 
end can assuredly only be successfully achieved by the help 
of cloud soaring, but Nehring, the master on the hillsides, 
had overlooked this fact.
Undeterred, he tried his luck a second time, but could 
only manage an extra mile and a quarter. Although he 
did not succeed in winning the sixty-mile prize, he broke 
his own world record of the previous year for distance 
flights with the flight of forty-three and a half miles he 
made on April 25th.
By now it had become high time for me to get to work 
if I had any serious intentions of trying for this prize. 
I had selected for my attempt the terrain of the Teuto- 
burger Wald, a district which, as far as flying was concerned, 
bore more similarity to the Rossitten dune country than 
to the mountains of the Rhon. The slopes of its hillsides 
were very low, the starting place lying only sixty-five feet 
above the surrounding level country. I had explored the 
district several times on a motor cycle, but its wide expanse 
rendered it impossible for me to make the close investigation 
I should have desired. However, time was pressing.
My first start resulted in a failure. While Nehring had 
tried on his last flight to make use of cloud upwind, I

--- PAGE 138 ---
4 4 At
THE AUTHOR'S HKTTRX FROM HIS FIRST 1'i.orn FLIGHT 
(The Himmcldankberg flight in the Rhun 11VJ8 Meeting)
Fadn

--- PAGE 139 ---
20. 
A GROUP OF SOARING FLYERS AT THE RHOX IN 1928. 
LEFT TO RIGHT : 
Wolf Hirth, Ferdinand Schulz, Max Kcgel, Edgar Dittmar, Fritz Stamer, Robert KronfelcL
Facing pas,e 99

--- PAGE 140 ---
FIRST SIXTY-MILE SOARING FLIGHT 
99
had resolved to make a trial of slope flying. 
But this 
proved insufficient ; after covering twenty-one miles, I was 
forced to land in a gap.
Ultimately I found that although this first sixty-mile 
flight was chiefly a slope-soaring affair, it could not have 
been accomplished without the aid of cloud upwind. On 
May 15th, 1929, a beautiful day, I started and flew along 
the hillsides, waiting for the help of a cloud only when 
slope upwind threatened to fail me entirely. At the 
same time I did no actual cloud soaring, but merely delayed 
my passage across the gaps until a cloud travelling in my 
direction floated above me and gave me the support of its 
upwind. Consequently I had often to wait a long time 
before I could pass from one upwind slope to another ; 
the whole flight was (like all slope soaring) difficult, detailed 
flying work, and I only barely contrived to cover the 
required distance.
It was this flight that revealed to me most clearly the 
drawbacks of slope soaring in comparison with cloud soaring. 
By the latter expression I do not mean merely a flight with 
cumuli, but also the utilization of atmospheric conditions 
which are quite independent of the influences of the ground 
and its formations. For a long time I had been wondering 
how it might be possible for me to progress to further 
achievement, as it was necessary deliberately to explore 
fresh fields of enterprise if the tenth Rhon meeting was to 
be a worthy successor of its predecessors.
Looking back, we can distinguish three phases of 
development. First came the technical development where- 
by the machines that could soar were evolved ; then followed 
the sporting period during which these machines were 
made to do all that it was possible for them to do ; finally 
there was the sporting-cum-scientific period in which 
trained thought had to direct the efforts of both sport and 
technique.
The extremely limited means at our disposal for flying 
sport in Germany made it impossible for us to hold a 
pupils' competition on the Wasserkuppe this year at the 
same time as the events for trained flyers and experts. 
Although the result of this was that comparatively few

--- PAGE 141 ---
ioo KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
planes were entered, there were certain exhilarating 
moments when we could watch more than ten planes tacking 
silently off the hillside at the same time. A duration 
prize had again been offered to the young flyers out of their 
apprenticeship in order to encourage them to cultivate 
staying power, and there was also a prize for the greatest 
elevation attained that would accustom them to cloud flying. 
On principle the conditions governing the events for the 
experts were left unaltered.
The standard of this year's meeting was clearly shown 
by the results of the trained flyers' events. Achievements 
that would formerly have constituted records were now 
quite commonplace. The young flyers had one and all 
mastered the technique of the cloud flying which I had 
demonstrated for the first time the year before, and 
consequently heights of from one thousand six hundred to 
two thousand feet were frequently reached. Even Dittmar's 
record height of 1928 was broken several times by newly- 
trained flyers. The average achievements were so high 
that it seemed entirely a matter of course that a pilot who 
had passed his " C " test during the competition should 
fly up to a height of over two thousand feet above the 
Wasserkuppe the very next day. Here, also, we perceived 
the value of soaring as schooling for flying in general. A 
young pilot named Bedau got into the clouds with his plane 
for a short time and was forced to " fly blind." He 
emerged with credit from an ordeal which is considered 
a most trying one even by pilots of engine-driven aeroplanes.
Meanwhile the planes " Darmstadt " and " M i " were 
fighting for the trained flyers' duration prize. The 
" Darmstadt " was piloted by Neininger, a colleague of 
Nehring, who was taking part in the " Tour of Europe " 
flight. Neininger set up a new Rhon duration record 
with a flight of eight hours twenty-six minutes thirty 
seconds, while Herr Mayer of Aachen, an engineer, piloting 
a machine of his own design, was only four minutes behind 
him. Although the staying powers of the pilots were still 
unexhausted, this contest had to be broken off on account 
of a fog that arose with nightfall and rendered further 
flying dangerous.

--- PAGE 142 ---
FIRST SIXTY-MILE SOARING FLIGHT 101
With greater eagerness even than usual we looked forward 
to the experts' events. In spring a flight of sixty miles 
had been made over specially chosen country, and the 
question at issue now was whether it would be possible to 
repeat this performance from the mountains of the Rhon. 
The speculations of those pilots who placed the welfare 
of the movement above their personal ambitions were 
anxious ones. One thing was certain : the new record 
was hardly likely to be broken by slope soaring alone, at 
least as far as a start from the Wasserkuppe was concerned.
On the third day of the meeting a thunderstorm passed 
over the Wasserkuppe. I had already given much careful
KRONFBLD'S Recmo RJ&MT &v THE
OF THUNDERSTORM
n u 111 n n 11 n i it i
.\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\ 
\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\
\\\\\\ \\ \\\ \\\\\\\\\ 
uv.
thought to the chances of utilizing the energies of such a 
storm and as it did not seem wise to attempt to battle with 
the difficulties of such weather unaided in my light machine, 
I had equipped the " Wien " with a contrivance for 
carrying a parachute.
I started at the exact moment when the storm burst 
over the summit. According to the plan I had already 
worked out and discussed with Professor Georgii, I set 
myself to keep my machine continually before the front. 
At first I was by no means certain whether this would 
prove possible as the wind was so violent that the steering 
power and flying speed of my plane hardly seemed capable 
of enabling me to remain in advance of the storm roller 
which was driving over the land. For a time I flew quite 
close to the cloud wall and struggled with violent gusts,

--- PAGE 143 ---
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
but during this early stage of the flight it became clear to 
me that I was entirely independent from any influences 
created by the formation of the ground. The plane, with 
which I had not made a single tack on the slope, continued to 
climb and at last, after a hard fight, I rose above the 
actual thunderstorm roller and could observe from above 
the projections of the front and the direction in which it 
was travelling across the land. After careful consideration 
I followed the course which suggested itself to me as best. 
The difference between my flight and Kegel's in 1926 
lay in my systematic use of meteorological information. 
For a time I maintained a position immediately before and 
above the storm where upwind was to be expected, but 
later I tried to push out before its majestic front. I 
succeeded in doing so and discovered that even two or three 
miles in advance of the storm there was still enough 
upwind to keep me aloft. 
So I flew on at a height varying 
from six to ten thousand feet above all the influences of the 
earth and travelled far across the plain. 
I was only forced 
to land by the coming of night.
Thus, on July 2Oth, 1929, I established a double world 
record by making deliberate use of a meteorological 
phenomenon. My distance from start to landing place 
was eighty-five and a half miles, and I attained a maximum 
elevation of seven thousand five hundred and twenty-five 
feet.
My trusty " Wien " had suffered some slight damage 
during this thunderstorm flight, and the next few days 
were taken up by repairs. Meanwhile Hirth performed 
a masterly exploit by accomplishing a goal flight to the 
Schweinsberg and back. He set off from the mountain 
which was his starting place at a height of one thousand 
three hundred and twenty feet, and as the Schweinsberg 
itself offered no favourable upwinds he remained above a 
neighbouring hillside for a considerable time in order to 
increase his elevation. During this time he also made use 
of the upwind under a passing cloud, and the height he 
thus gained enabled him to fly to the goal. But the return 
journey proved more difficult than had generally been antici- 
pated, so that Hirth was forced to reach the Wasserkuppe

--- PAGE 144 ---
,'30. 
THE " RnoxfiEisT " (SPIRIT OF THE Rnox) BEING PREPARED FOR A FLIGHT WIIEX THE
TEMPERATURE STOOD AT '20 DEGREES (CELSIUS)
Fticing page 10i

--- PAGE 145 ---
.'31. 
KUONFELD IN THE " WIEX "
Facing pa$c 103

--- PAGE 146 ---
FIRST SIXTY-MILE SOARING FLIGHT 
103
by soaring along slopes far below it and then working 
himself up, thus reminding us of Nehring's magnificent 
technique. He landed three hundred and forty-five yards 
from the starting place after a flight to a goal nearly seven 
miles away.
This same pilot gained the prize for regional exploration 
by two flights, one over a course of seventeen miles, and 
the other over one of twenty-four and a half miles.
Ten days after my two world records the weather 
conditions of the area we intended to use for our flights 
were excellent. Mighty cumuli drifted over the summit, 
and everything that could fly was in the air. That day 
witnessed a whole series of fine flights, among them a 
cloud flight by a young pilot named Groenhoff, who flew 
with a passenger. He reached a height of four thousand 
one hundred and twenty-eight feet, from which elevation 
he glided twenty miles a double record for a two-seater. 
I started about the same time as the others, worked my way 
up under a mighty cumulus and flew into it with the aid 
of the strong upwind. My plane, which naturally could 
no longer be seen from the ground, climbed and climbed. 
Flying within the cloud was not easy ; traffic pilots who 
must sometimes " fly blind " for long periods take special 
instruments with them, for, as is well known, nothing 
whatever can be seen inside the cloud and even the most 
necessary points of contact are lacking. Without an 
artificial horizon many pilots lose control of their machines. 
Greatly to my sorrow, my speed indicator struck work in 
consequence of the choking moisture, and for more than 
half an hour I flew in the clouds by instinctive airsense 
alone, climbing continuously. At length I emerged at a 
height of one thousand five hundred and fifty feet from the 
same cumulus which I had entered at four thousand six 
hundred and twenty feet, thus accomplishing the first 
flight with a soaring plane in which such a cloud had been 
climbed through and the plane enabled to soar above the 
cloud ocean. I flew among the cloud peaks for an hour.
Meanwhile the last machine had landed on the Wasser- 
kuppe and as nobody expected a great record in that 
weather, the good folk began to be uneasy about my non-

--- PAGE 147 ---
104 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
appearance. But I flew steadily on. First I crossed a 
plain fifty miles wide to the next hillside ; then I worked 
my way over the Frankenwald and the Fichtelgebirge for 
four hours by slope flying, in which the experience I had 
gained in the course of my flight in the Teutoburger Wald, 
when I had so often had to do such detailed flying, stood 
me in good stead. I landed at last in rain and wind and 
a foggy twilight after a flight of nearly ninety miles. My 
greatest height above the starting point was eight thousand 
five hundred and forty-six feet, so that I broke my own
KRQNFEID'S RECORD FLIGHT BY THE HELP OP CLOUD
\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\ \\\\\\
\\\\\\\\\\\\ \\\\\ \\\\ \\
, \ \\\ \\\\\\ \\ \\\ \\\\ \\\\ 
V\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\ \\\\\\\\
two world records in weather in which such long flights 
had hitherto been deemed impossible. But the records 
were not the most valuable results of this flight, for, as on 
the previous occasion, I was able to indicate the lines along 
which soaring must be developed if it was to produce the 
greatest results. Consequently the highest trophy of that 
year's competition, the Hindenburg cup, was awarded to 
me in recognition of the flying and scientific knowledge 
which my flight had acquired.
And so the tenth, the jubilee, competition, ended with 
a height record three times as great as that of the year before 
and a distance record twice as great.
Ten years of competition had passed by. Up on the 
Rhon, where formerly a few idealists whom most people 
ridiculed had pursued a new and uncertain idea, there is 
now a home for serious sporting and scientific work. Great

--- PAGE 148 ---
32. KRONFELD'S RECORD FLIGHT BY THE HELP OF CLOUD SOARING
1,500
0 L-.
Facing page 1U4

--- PAGE 149 ---
33. 
THE LIGHT WIND SOAKER IN WHICH LIEUTENANT DINORT 
ACCOMPLISHED HIS FAMOUS DURATION FLIGHT
CUMULUS Si;UN FROM ABOVE
l"'ucing page 105

--- PAGE 150 ---
FIRST SIXTY-MILE SOARING FLIGHT 
105
aeroplane hangars have been put up as well as accommo- 
dation for many hundreds of people. Pupils come from 
all the ends of the earth to imbibe the knowledge and 
experience which we have gained by long and strenuous 
work. When once a year the best pilots meet in emulation 
on the Rhon, the green hillsides are black with human 
beings. They come in thousands to marvel at motorless 
flying, to see and to learn. All languages may be heard 
there ; people from all lands are encountered.
The machines, which are finer and more skilfully built 
than any other flying machines, the successes and experiences 
which are reflected in the records achieved, and countless 
details connected with flying in general and with wind and 
weather lore will unite to proclaim the stupendous fact :
" Ten years of soaring competition lie behind us, ten 
years of sacrifice, struggle and success."

--- PAGE 151 ---
SOARING PILOTS REPORT
A
S the great success of soaring flight on the Rhon 
during these ten years was achieved by the co- 
operation of all concerned, it is only just to allow those 
who put their best efforts into our work to tell their own 
tales.
NEHRING TELLS THE TALE 
I
Alas for our poor " Margarete " ! 
Why was I destined 
to be her murderer ?
It was one of those lovely days which are so rare on 
the Wasserkuppe blue sky, beautiful, white, heaped clouds 
and withal a steady, warm south-easterly breeze just the 
weather for a roving flight! At that time we had only 
our good old " Margarete " on the Kuppe, as the " Darm- 
stadt " was still at home in the workshop, where it had to be 
nailed and glued and painted. But we did not need it ; 
in this wonderful breeze " Margarete " was the best possible 
flyer.
So, one after the other, several passengers went up with 
me, and they were all enthusiastic about the delights of 
soaring and the splendid bird's eye view of the Rhon. 
In the meantime a special prize had been announced for the 
longest flight of the day. " Margarete " must win it, I 
decided, and, in order to take advantage of every chance, I 
went up alone this time. The decrease of weight enabled 
me to gain a greater height, but when I was over the Pelzner- 
hang I turned to fly back to the Kuppe, towards which I now 
rushed madly with a cross-wind behind me. For a 
moment my attention wandered. I turned a trifle too late 
above the Flying School and was carried by the wind beyond 
the " Baude " (the Inn on the top of the Wasserkuppe). 
It was lucky for me that I was still about one hundred
106

--- PAGE 152 ---
SOARING PILOTS REPORT 
107
and thirty feet high. " If only I am not forced down 
on to the * Baude' or into the downdraught behind 
the Kuppe," I thought, " or, worst of all, among the 
people who are standing about in such dense groups." 
I pressed the bird as strongly as possible in an effort to 
push forward against the wind, which is always strongest 
close above the hill tops. I was just flying over the " Baude " 
at a height of about fifty feet, and hoping to reach salvation 
in the upwind in about another thirty.
Suddenly the stick jerked in my hand ! 
" The aileron!" 
I crie