 
anyone who has acquired a taste for flying through soaring 
not to feel an ambition to take up power-driven flying sooner 
or later, and this of itself opens up new paths.

--- PAGE 396 ---
THE FUTURE OF SOARING FLIGHT 309
The main principle of gliding and of soaring schooling 
is that of unaided flight. With this principle is united the 
idea of a natural process of instruction, which begins with 
gliding ; then comes soaring, and later follow the transitional 
exercises. Landings at a fixed goal, such as are usual 
in power-driven flight, can also be made by soaring. The 
pupil will have to practise steep turns until at last he is able to 
attempt correct " tail landings " in a machine specially 
built for that purpose. When he has progressed so far, we 
can with an easy conscience permit him to train in a 
transitional aircraft, which will be a small one-seater power- 
plane adapted to soaring purposes—the only difference 
being that the pilot would also have to control an engine. 
The pupil would, of course, fly solo, and when he could 
control this type of machine he could practise with a machine 
carrying a more powerful engine. Thus we see the quite 
natural development of flying from the first " hop " in a 
glider to the control of heavy power-driven aircraft. The 
earliest power-pilots learnt in this way—and here we have the 
explanation of their superlative skill, for this is the sole 
method by which we can learn to make ourselves one 
with our machine. We learn in the truest sense of the 
word, because we are not drilled by a system of dual 
controls, as is the case with the present pupils that go up 
in power-driven machines.
The future holds great opportunities for the expert 
soarers. It must not be forgotten that they are the elite 
of gliding and soaring flight, perhaps of any kind of flight.
Flying grounds are here the most important factor, and 
in this respect there is much systematic work still to be done. 
We must discover the suitable localities for soaring in every 
country. 
Soaring can take place over dunes and hillsides, 
and also even above the edges of woods, rows of houses, 
reservoirs and railway embankments if they are high enough. 
We must begin by ascertaining where there are such places 
and possibilities ; then maps can be made to show the best 
slopes for flying when the wind blows in certain directions. 
Descriptions of starting and landing places and other useful 
information would be appended.
By glancing at a map the practised soarer is already able

--- PAGE 397 ---
310 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
to discern which hillsides are suitable for long flights. 
It is only necessary to turn over the pages of an atlas 
to discover where a flight of ten or a hundred or a thousand 
miles could be best carried out. There are regions in the 
world where we already know that it would be possible to 
soar for many hundred miles with or without a passenger.
But now it is possible to fly independently of the land, 
and the future will see further progress in this direction, for 
our present cloud flights are the merest trial trips. Special 
experience will have to be gained before great achievements 
in cloud flying, thunderstorm flying or flights on " cold 
fronts " can be expected. These latter extend across whole 
continents at times, and travel over them for days together. 
It would undoubtedly be practicable to fly for thousands of 
miles with them if we knew the right methods and developed 
the right kind of machine. Then we must also develop the 
possibilities of soaring by means of warm currents on hot, 
windless days—an art as yet very little understood. 
So far 
very few really long flights have been carried out with the 
help of this method. Undoubtedly it will become popular 
just as rapidly as cloud soaring has, for long flights are 
easier the less wind you have and the flatter the country. 
Thus thermal soaring is the direct completion of auto and 
aeroplane towing. It is surely possible to reach with the 
help of auto towing heights sufficient to enable the pilot 
immediately to find thermal currents and then fly on for 
hours over the level country.
Our immediate goal (which certainly seems attainable) 
is to ensure that there shall no longer be any kind of weather 
in which we cannot fly. We must imagine the expert 
soarer of the future as glancing at the weather in the 
morning, just as a sailor does. Prior to his flight he will 
have made his plans in accordance with the weather fore­ 
casts ; then he will fly off, make use of warm currents, 
drift with the clouds or tack along slopes according to 
circumstances. He will know how to make skilled use of 
thunderstorms, but probably no single flight will be 
carried out by means of any one of these methods alone, 
but by a combination of several in accordance with country, 
course, changes of weather, etc.

--- PAGE 398 ---
THE FUTURE OF SOARING FLIGHT 311
Now a word about the pilots. They, too, must im­ 
prove. 
Soaring still demands the sensitive training, syste­ 
matically thought out to the minutest detail, that is to be 
found in other sports. We must learn to fly better, and 
flight must be made easier by better resources, such as 
more suitable machines, and by the invention of various 
instruments. 
For example an instrument that would 
indicate the machine's entrance into a layer of warmer air 
would often help the pilot to a speedy decision. Flying 
intelligence must also be trained by increased meteorological 
knowledge.
The day cannot be far off when, as is the case in every 
other sport, the masters from the most distant lands will 
meet in friendly rivalry and exchange experiences. An 
Olympiad for soaring would show a splendid struggle. 
To-day there are signs of life and progress in our sport 
throughout the world, and the time must come when all 
nations, all pilots and all skill will be united for one great 
sporting demonstration.
Much depends upon technique, the progress of which 
is always irregular. A machine that is only very slightly 
better in certain respects than another, possessing, for 
example, a lower sinking speed or a better gliding angle, 
can obtain results seemingly out of all proportion to its 
slight superiority. While its inferior rival drops down 
into a gap, it will reach the next slope, from which it may 
often fly on a hundred miles, hundreds of miles farther, 
just as far, that is to say, as the length of the mountain 
range permits.
In the development of technique two phases may generally 
be observed ; the first, in which enthusiastic inventors 
gifted with vivid imaginations venture into the realms of 
the impossible ; this is followed by the second in which 
many unsuccessful experiments lead to the moment when 
some great man of science produces proofs of the futility 
of all that has been done. Often enough it has been shown 
that the one of these phases is just as wrong as the other.
The problem of flight by means of movable wings, which 
is in abeyance for the moment, is one that needs solution, 
and it will be the task of the soarers to bring us practical

--- PAGE 399 ---
3i2 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
proof as to whether anything is to be attained in that 
direction, but there are still other possibilities. With a 
propelling force of one to two h.p. the most efficient types 
of sailplanes can already fly horizontally, i.e. they can 
keep themselves hovering without any upwind. We 
must not even entirely deny the possibility of man one day 
learning to fly by his own power.
Another need of the moment is a sailplane with an 
auxiliary motor in the true sense of the word. Hitherto 
no suitable light motor has been found. In that direction 
lie new possibilities for soaring over level stretches of 
country, achieving contact with clouds and the bridging 
over of gaps.
There are also other resources which we can call to our 
aid. The fast motor-car can and must be further developed 
as a launching agent, while a slow sailplane can also be 
sent up as a kite at the end of a rope and then set free 
for further independent flight.
In the chapter on " Auto and Aeroplane Towing " we 
have seen that auto-towed flight has been the means of 
bringing soaring flight to the flat country. It has simplified 
the organization of the soaring school to such an extent, 
that auto-towed flight will be possible in training quarters 
situated in the close neighbourhood of cities and towns, 
where the business-man will be able to glide and soar during 
the short leisure periods at his disposal. It is probable that 
the beginner's entire training, sooner or later, will be 
carried through by this method.
Both free and captive balloons can likewise lift soaring 
planes, and it has been found feasible to tow them aloft by 
means of aeroplanes. In future aeroplane towing will gain 
more and more ground. To-day we are already at a point 
where, even if we cannot soar, by means of a few minutes 
of expensive towed flight we are able to do many minutes 
of cheap gliding flight. Conditions are even more ad­ 
vantageous when we think of soaring. Then the aero­ 
plane in cloudy or cumulus weather can take a squadron of 
sailplanes up in an hour, and leave them under a cloud 
where they then can fly on for hours. As we have shown 
before, it will be possible in future to execute the whole of

--- PAGE 400 ---
THE FUTURE OF SOARING FLIGHT 313
the soarer's training up to the highest performances in the 
level country, and this by using automobile towing and 
later upon taking the more advanced pupils and experienced 
pilots into the up-current areas of the clouds. In the future 
of soaring flight, aeroplane towing will hold an important 
position. This is the next direction in which experiments 
will be made for the method has a value that is not merely 
a sporting one. It should prove possible to harness a 
heavy machine, consisting mainly of engine and tanks, to a 
glider capable of carrying a number of passengers, the 
advantage of such an arrangement being that the motor- 
power, with its attendant danger of fire, is completely 
separated from the passengers' compartments. 
Such a 
glider could land on its skid—a great advantage in cases of 
forced landings. If several gliders were thus attached one 
behind the other, it would be possible to detach them and 
their passengers successively at localities along the prescribed 
route. In this way mail could also be conveyed safely to its 
destination.
Experiments of this kind have already been successfully 
made from airships, and perhaps in the future every air 
ship will carry its life-gliders, just as now every ocean 
liner carries its lifeboats. Should a " fly ing-train/' such as 
I have described above, be carrying valuable consignments, 
as, for example, gold from a bank, to a place lying on the 
flying route, it would always be advisable to send the 
consignment down in a glider steered by a good pilot 
rather than to trust it to a parachute which is liable to 
be carried in a wrong direction by unexpected wind 
currents.
Sailplanes might also make advantageous use of the 
newest form of propulsion, the rocket. This is really 
the ideal auxiliary motor force, its great advantage being 
that it weighs nothing after it has been used, as the empty 
casing can probably be detached. For starting purposes 
a powerful propulsive rocket could take the place of the 
present starting crew.
It may even not be necessary to make use of such powerful 
means. In order to move forward, a sailing boat on the 
water makes use of the difference in velocity between two

--- PAGE 401 ---
314 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
mediums—air and water ; in the air itself there are similar 
differences. The mast of the sailing boat also rises from 
one layer of air into another ; if we wish to apply this 
method in the atmosphere, we must accommodate ourselves to 
atmospheric conditions. As a rule the air close to the 
ground travels at a considerably slower rate than the higher 
layers, while sometimes it happens that completely different 
directions are taken by a current of air a hundred feet or 
so above a lower one. In that case, we have two mediums 
moving in opposite directions, but it would naturally be 
nonsensical for a soarer to contemplate utilizing this 
difference by any means similar to the mast of a ship. 
He has to find some new way of obtaining contact with the 
upper layer, and a Bavarian inventor, Herr Wolfmiiller, 
advises the employment of a kite for such purposes. If 
there was no wind or only a very slight and slowly moving 
breeze it would be possible to have a sailplane drawn 
along the ground by means of a kite which had risen into 
a layer where the air was moving more rapidly. Audacious 
as his idea may seem, Herr Wolfmiiller has proved its 
feasibility. Owing to lack of means he could not experi­ 
ment with a glider, but he sent up two kites, connected 
by a rope ; on every occasion they flew so far in this fashion 
that they disappeared ultimately from the sight of the 
watchers. In this direction there is opportunity for work 
which may prove profitable for soarers.
There is one great and much disputed problem which I 
have intentionally left untouched till the last. This is the 
question of dynamic soaring. In the earliest days of 
soaring flight many people maintained that only such 
soaring could lead to any practical results, but later, when 
soaring as it is now generally practised, i.e. static soaring, 
obtained such good results, the problem was almost lost 
sight of. Now it is emerging again, and the task before 
us is that of learning to fly without up-currents by utilizing 
the gusts of the air or the different velocities of movements 
in apparently horizontal air currents. 
The earliest inquirers 
into the problems of air velocities discovered that the 
wind never blows quite regularly. Every pilot, whether 
soarer or power-pilot, knows that it is possible to utilize

--- PAGE 402 ---
THE FUTURE OF SOARING FLIGHT 315
isolated gusts for the gaining of height, but we do not yet 
know the best methods of doing this.
Again and again we are stimulated to further inquiries 
in this direction by our observation of soaring birds, such as 
the albatross. On the occasion of a recent journey round the 
world, Professor Prandtl, the director of the Aerodynamic 
Research Institute of Gottingen, studied the flight of these 
birds, which are the best soarers of the feathered world. 
While many observers believe that ocean birds only fly 
in the up-currents produced by the crests of the waves, 
Prandtl has another explanation of their long and wide 
journeys over the billows. 
On the voyage from Yokohama 
to Honolulu he was able to gain a clear idea of their method 
of flight.
They utilize the difference between the wind velocity 
immediately above the surface of the water over which 
they have chosen to fly and that higher up. They rise 
against the wind by means of the energy which is freed 
when they climb suddenly from a slowly moving layer 
into a more rapid one. Having risen, they turn and fly 
down again with the increased speed they have gained ; 
in the lower layer they repeat the manoeuvre. 
The amount 
of energy which can be acquired in this way can be calculated 
mathematically ; hence it follows that we ought to be 
able to hover above the sea for as long and as far as we 
desire, provided that there is a wind of sorts. This axiom 
is applicable everywhere where different atmospheric 
velocities are to be encountered.
It has also been shown theoretically and by experiments 
in wind tunnels that climbing is feasible in variable winds 
which blow in gusts from different directions on our level 
or from above or below us.
All these problems—most particularly that of the general 
nature of wind gusts—have not been sufficiently exploited, 
and we cannot say what future investigations of their nature 
will be possible. It is futile to deny the possibility of 
solving any technical problem, for which reason it should 
be possible to imitate the flight of the albatross with a 
small machine that could easily be manoeuvred. 
There 
is a crying need for " wind feelers,"—instruments that

--- PAGE 403 ---
316 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
would indicate beforehand the rising and falling of 
wind.
It is hardly necessary to discuss more fully the numerous 
(but often quite useless) experiments which have been 
carried out in all directions in connection with soaring 
flight, as I have already pointed out some useful fields of 
inquiry. 
Soaring is a sufficient miracle in itself, while the 
progress from Lilienthal's first leaps to our present cloud 
soaring has surely not been more difficult than it will 
prove from the latter to long flights across the ocean. 
The programme of immediate work indicated in this 
chapter is one worthy of occupying our finest brains and 
sternest energies for years to come. This book is not 
intended to be a statement of grey theory ; I should prefer 
it to be a stimulation, a finger-post pointing the way to 
practical progress. Therefore, let us get to work ! 
Let 
us betake ourselves to the flying fields, the workshops 
and the observatories !
The future of soaring is still uncertain. Every take- 
off is a matter of uncertainty for the pilot, even though it be 
the beginning of a record flight. 
Gay optimism, faith in 
human ability and a cheerful willingness to take the rough 
with the smooth are the elements which compose the 
flying spirit, as I know it in the best sense of the word. I 
have no fears for the future of soaring, and I earnestly desire 
that this little book might be a helpful stone in the structure 
of its proud edifice.
Soaring belongs to youth, and to both belongs the future !

--- PAGE 404 ---
THE PROGRESS OF SAILPLANING THROUGH­ 
OUT THE WORLD
D
URING the last ten years remarkable evidence 
of the rapid progress of sailplaning has been provided 
by the results attained through the annual competitions 
in the Rhon. The development of this new kind of sport, 
both as regards the scientific and practical value of the 
achievements has been undoubtedly brought about mainly 
in Germany. Moreover, the importance of soaring and 
of its scientific results has secured recognition throughout 
the world to an ever increasing extent. New ground has 
been gained with striking rapidity. Records were set up 
and broken, the whole world taking an active share in the 
movement.
Even prior to 1930, reports were received from distant 
and secluded districts of Russia of a sailplaning competition, 
the importance of which was hardly inferior to that of 
similar meetings in Germany. Gliding and soaring had 
made great strides in that country. The development 
programme comprised the formation of sixty new gliding 
schools.
In the autumn of 1929 another competition took place 
in the hilly regions of the Crimea, where the soaring 
experts Hesselbach, Schulz and Nehring had previously 
set up their records. The competitors had to undergo 
nine tests, the Russian conditions requiring flights of 
twenty-five minutes' duration. Wenzlaw in his high 
efficiency sailplane, which had a wing span of fifty-two 
feet reached a predetermined point of twenty-one and two- 
third miles (34.8 km.) away and brought his machine back 
to the start. With a flight of ten hours twenty-two minutes 
the winner of the duration flight competition, Stepan 
Tschonok, was also able to beat the times achieved in the 
Rhon. The great heights attained were perhaps the most 
interesting feature. Both Koschitz and Jumaschef rose to
317

--- PAGE 405 ---
3i8 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
a height of four thousand six hundred and forty feet 
(one thousand five hundred and twenty metres) above 
starting level. These results, which were achieved under 
a cloudless sky were undoubtedly possible only by the 
exploitation of thermal currents set up by the exceptionally 
powerful rays of the sun prevailing in the Crimea immedi­ 
ately after a shower of rain. In attaining this height Koschitz 
also managed to cover a distance of over twenty-one and 
a half miles (34.6 km.).
The large number of five hundred and eighty-eight 
flights made in the course of the competition and amounting 
to a total duration of one hundred hours provided proof 
of the progressive energy of the Russian sailplaning 
movement.
In the spring of 1930 gliding was taken up with renewed 
vigour in England. During the previous winter on the 
invitation of the Royal Aeronautical Society, Professor 
Georgii lectured before that Society and explained to the 
experts the practical gliding results hitherto attained as well 
as the intrinsic value of the new sport. However, the 
majority of the sporting community was anxious to see a 
practical demonstration of the possibilities of the glider. 
In the latter half of May, therefore, I went to England, 
taking with me the " Wien " in order to demonstrate the 
methods of soaring and to advise interested groups and 
clubs on practical gliding instruction.
Demonstrating and lecturing from the time I arrived 
until the middle of July, when I returned to Germany in 
order to participate in the Rhon competition, I passed the 
most successful time of my activities in an atmosphere of 
sincerest friendship and sporting camaraderie. In a period 
of six weeks, with the assistance of the British Gliding 
Association—whose chairman Mr. Gordon England took 
a large share in the responsibility for the success of my 
demonstrations, as did the President of the Royal Aero­ 
nautical Society, Colonel the Master of Sempill—I was 
able to carry out seven meetings and in co-operation with the 
young German gliding expert Karl Magersuppe, who 
had been brought over to England by the Daily Express^ 
managed to rouse the enthusiasm of thousands of spectators

--- PAGE 406 ---
83. 
THE " FAFNIR " FLOWN BY GUNTKR GKOEXIIOFF
Facing page 318

--- PAGE 407 ---
Tin: " FAFMK "' TAKIXC OFF. 
Tins is THE MACHINE IN WHICH GL NTEK
(jROENIIOFF MADE 
A 
NUMUER OF Sl'ECTACU LAK 
FLIGHTS AM) RECORDS.
page o

--- PAGE 408 ---
PROGRESS OF SAILPLANING 
319
as well as many of the foremost air experts of Great Britain.
The short time at our disposal was crowded with giving 
demonstrations, explanations and reports. The interest 
taken in the lectures I gave in Maidstone, Portsmouth, 
Folkestone, and London was merely a small indication 
of the enthusiasm with which the British sporting community 
embraced this new sport.
On Whitsunday in the course of a three hours' flight 
from Itford Hill I twice succeeded in picking up a strong 
rising current under alto-cumulus clouds, which carried me 
to a height of two thousand three hundred feet above 
starting level.
On the 15th June I reached Portsmouth from Itford Hill, 
following the Downs as far as Petersfield and coming 
down on Portsdown Hill late in the evening. This was 
the first successful major long-distance flight in England. 
Whilst I was engaged in inspecting the country near 
Weymouth for a further demonstration Karl Magersuppe 
carried out a flight of three hours ten minutes duration 
on the aist June.
Only by exploiting very carefully indeed, every small 
up-current from the slopes of the hills did I manage to 
bridge the gaps in the range of the South Downs. The 
effort raised general enthusiasm in England since the 
success apparently provided the proof that the English 
countryside actually permitted carrying out of long-distance 
glides.
Since then strong ties of mutual friendship have bound 
me to the British air sport community. I regard as one of 
my greatest privileges the fact that I was given the oppor­ 
tunity of demonstrating to His Royal Highness the Prince 
of Wales the art of soaring flight. 
Shortly afterwards, at 
the beginning of July, I had to return to Germany for the 
Rhon Competitions. With a heavy heart I took leave of 
England, and my sailplane " Wien" accompanied me 
across the Channel, as yet unaware of the fact that the next 
time we should both take a view of these waters would be 
from the air.
In order to raise the standard of the efficiency of both the 
pilots and the machines, minimum standards set for the nth

--- PAGE 409 ---
320 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
Annual Rhon competitions were generally increased. 
Although this fact alone provided an incentive to the 
pilots, the considerable improvement in the results, more 
particularly in the practice flight competition was mainly 
due to the close rivalry existing between a number of 
pilots of more or less equal skill and ability.
The utmost energy was expended in the Rhon on 
duration flights. Even in the preceding year there had 
been only two flights exceeding five hours in duration. 
In 1931 there were as many as twelve such flights, seven 
of which were extended to upwards of seven hours. 
Van 
Husen of the " Akademische Fliegergruppe " of Gottingen 
returned the longest time with eight hours thirty-eight 
minutes. He was closely followed by Mayer of the 
" Luftfahrtvereinigung," Aix-la-Chapelle, who remained 
in the air for eight hours twenty-eight minutes. Both 
these pilots had really entered for the performance compe­ 
tition but the sporting inducement offered by the close 
rivalry to secure the duration prize for practice pilots was 
too much for them. How closely this prize was contested 
will be gathered from the fact that Starck of the " Akad­ 
emische Fliegergruppe,'' Darmstadt, made three flights 
of five hours duration each, in order to win a special prize.
During these duration flights cloud soaring was generally 
practised. This will be made apparent by a study of the 
considerably greater heights attained. Bedau reached a 
height of five thousand three hundred and eighty feet 
(one thousand six hundred and forty metres) above the 
starting point in the " Luftikus." Bedau, who had been 
in the air for over three hours, was caught in a particularly 
strong up-current inside a cloud, apparently strengthened 
by the rising current from the hillside. His machine was 
carried up at a speed of sixteen and a half feet per second. 
Inside the cloud Bedau evidently lost his sense of equilib­ 
rium, for presently he was seen to emerge from the cloud 
in a steep downward spiral, the barograph recording a 
velocity of descent of eighty-two feet per second. Bedau 
flattened out and resumed his glide in the ordinary manner, 
completing a flight of seven hours thirty-four seconds' 
duration.

--- PAGE 410 ---
PROGRESS OF SAILPLANING 
321
This performance of Bedau's will convey an idea of 
what was required even of the practice pilots, as will also 
the total flying hours : Starck, twenty-seven and a half 
hours ; 
Bedau, twenty-four and a half hours ; 
Patz, 
sixteen and a half hours.
An innovation for the practice competition was the 
stipulation that the pilots were to fly to any point at least 
three miles (five kilometres) distant from the Wasserkuppe 
and then to fly back to the starting point without any 
intermediate landings.
The original idea of this prize was for the pilots to work 
their way along the hillsides. But matters turned out as 
they had done before when I made my Himmeldankburg 
flight in 1928. The competitors of the practice class 
secured the prize by cloud soaring. On the ijth the 
" Darmstadt " piloted by Starck had been in the air for 
several hours when he rose to a height of two thousand 
four hundred and ninety feet (seven hundred and sixty 
metres) by means of the rising current under a cloud. 
Heading against the wind under a cloud bank Starck took 
his glider a distance of three and a half miles (five thousand 
four hundred and fifty metres) and then returned to the 
Wasserkuppe with the tail wind. Bedau closely followed 
the " Darmstadt " but at the lower altitude of one thousand 
one hundred and eighty feet (three hundred and sixty 
metres). For this reason Bedau made for home somewhat 
sooner, after having covered a distance of three and a 
quarter miles (five thousand one hundred and fifty metres). 
The fact that such flights seldom fail where there is a 
suitable rising current under clouds was well illustrated 
by Patz, who on the " Rheinland " was also able to fulfil 
the conditions of a return flight in the course of the same 
afternoon. In certain circumstances and over shorter 
distances, it is undoubtedly easier to exploit the possibilities 
of cloud soaring than to struggle along by using the up- 
currents from each hillside. From this point of view 
Huch's flight though unfortunately not quite successful, 
was very satisfactory indeed. Huch managed to forge his 
way along the hillsides as far as the Milseburg, covering 
at least a distance of three miles (five kilometres). In

--- PAGE 411 ---
322 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
returning, however, he lost too much height to permit of 
a landing on the Wasserkuppe itself.
This year the pilots participating in the performance 
competition were set a difficult task. The weather con­ 
ditions were not nearly as favourable as in the preceding 
year. Rising currents under clouds were active only for 
a few hours at a time and did not suffice for long flights. 
Moreover, the long squall fronts were not plainly marked. 
The achievement of long distance was only gained by 
fighting every inch of the way. Under these conditions 
the younger pilots naturally found it hard to follow my 
example and cover the necessary ground for reaching the 
mountains of the Thiiringer Wald or the hilly regions 
beyond. Whereas I repeated my last year's performance 
of twice exceeding the ninety-three miles (one hundred and 
fifty kilometres) limit, the next best performances of the 
younger generation represented by Mayer, Hurttig, Groen- 
hoff and others were restricted to about one-third of the 
actual distance covered by myself.
Attempts have been made to give all kinds of explanations 
for this difference in the results. In some quarters it has 
been stated that my machine was very much better, in 
others, that I had a " pathological flair " for soaring. 
I 
am myself well aware of the fact that both opinions are far 
removed from the truth. Admittedly, my " Wien " is 
a high efficiency machine and has the advantage of behaving 
splendidly in rough weather as well as in a gentle breeze. 
Nevertheless, in every contest for which I entered this 
glider, there were several other machines of nearly equal 
performance, in some respects, in fact, even superior. 
The success of my efforts is not due to any particular 
flair but simply to systematic work in laying out my plans 
in conjunction with using my common sense when in the air. 
This was proved, for instance, when I flew along the 
course taken by Nehring in his " Darmstadt " in 1927, 
and under similar conditions I covered thirty-two miles 
(51.5 kilometres), coming down at exactly the same 
spot where at the time Nehring had 
effected 
his 
landing.
On August 13th several line squalls passed over the

--- PAGE 412 ---
PROGRESS OF SAILPLANING 
323
Wasserkuppe, the first one reaching the top of the hill 
shortly after 2 p.m. The squall was not very clearly 
defined and the up-current was weak. Nevertheless, I 
managed to climb to nine hundred and eighty-five feet 
(three hundred metres), at which height I attempted to 
get away. From the Wasserkuppe I reached the High 
Rhon, where I lost height to such an extent that I fell to 
six hundred and fifty-six feet (two hundred metres) below 
the summit of the Wasserkuppe before dropping into the 
valley dividing the Rhon from the Thiiringer Wald. 
Repeated showers made matters worse as they restricted 
visibility and added considerably to the weight of the 
machine. More particularly, the aerodynamical qualities 
of the glider were impaired by drops of rain clinging to 
the leading edge of the wing. At a very low altitude I 
finally succeeded in crossing the critical valley and I managed 
to regain height on reaching the hills of the Thiiringer 
Wald. At times, heavy rainfalls reduced the view to such 
an extent that it became impossible to distinguish the 
individual ranges for which I was heading. Seeing that 
the rain rendered flying too difficult I made up my mind 
to run ahead of the storm and to proceed from hilltop to 
hilltop along the Thiiringer Wald, taking the route I already 
knew. The squall, accompanied at intervals by thunder 
and lightning, followed about half-an-hour behind. Forging 
ahead from one hill to the next I reached the basin between 
Thiiringer Wald and the Fichtel Gebirge. Being too 
low to attempt this hop I waited for the following squall 
to approach which I saw coming up close behind. Three 
times I endeavoured to head into the squall standing at 
right angles to the side of the hill. The final attempt was 
successful and I was carried to a height of two thousand 
three hundred feet (seven hundred metres) thus attaining 
the greatest altitude of the flight after having been in the 
air for three hours. Whilst trying to make the most of 
the squall I was enveloped several times by the clouds. 
With my view thus obstructed I followed the path of the 
storm so as to avoid running into the hills of the Fichtel. 
I finally landed in the rain, fog and partial darkness three 
miles (five kilometres) as the crow flies, from the Czech

--- PAGE 413 ---
324 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
frontier, near Rehau, after covering a distance of ninety-five 
miles (150.3 kilometres).
The second line squall which passed over the Wasser- 
kuppe that day came up one and a half hours after I had 
taken off. It was stated by the experts that this squall 
showed a distinct rolling formation of the leading cloud 
besides being exceptionally strong. Unfortunately, the 
storm travelled so quickly that the gliders could not be got 
ready for launching in time. A further one and a half 
hours elapsed when a third rain storm appeared in the 
west. Hurttig managed to get his machine out early 
enough. A difficulty, however, arose inasmuch as the 
clouds hung very low, leaving the mountain tops enveloped 
in fog after their passage. Hurttig, who had gathered 
detailed information on the tactics of storm flights as 
described by me during the previous year, had his machine 
launched at the right moment, headed for the front of the 
line squall and was carried over the High Rhon after having 
attained a height of one thousand and fifty feet (three hun­ 
dred and twenty metres). On the lee side of the mountains 
he was caught in the strong downward currents but he 
soon picked up the front of the squall, which again lifted 
him to a height of one thousand two hundred and ten feet 
(four hundred metres) above the start. The rest of the 
flight as described by Hurttig himself and in accordance 
with the record of his barograph was very similar to my 
own flight of the previous year. Hurttig kept his machine 
at the proper altitude and at the correct distance from the 
front of the squall. Unfortunately, this continued only 
for a period of fifteen minutes, during which time the 
formation of the ground did not interfere and material 
variations in height were not recorded. Hurttig then got 
into the clouds, but he was lucky enough to come out again 
right over another valley, the crests of the mountains on 
either side already being capped by the fog. In this manner 
Hurttig managed to cover a distance of over twenty-five 
miles (40.6 kilometres). This effort proved that even the 
younger pilots can successfully carry out storm and line 
squall flights, provided they systematically and carefully 
make a study of the previous experience gained by others.

--- PAGE 414 ---
PROGRESS OF SAILPLANING 
325
Hurttig made two further distance flights exceeding 
twenty-five miles (forty kilometres), 
in the case of 
which he followed Nehring's well-known route along the 
hillsides.
The most interesting prize offered in this competition 
was the route prize. To secure this trophy the competitors 
were required to make a return flight to the nine and a half 
miles distant Kreuzberg (fifteen kilometres). This route 
could not be negotiated simply by following the crest of 
the hill. Hops had to be made across two valleys and a 
mountain ridge intervened running practically parallel to 
the wind. This latter obstacle could be overcome only 
by squeezing through a kind of pass. In view of the awk­ 
ward relative position of the ridge to the wind exceptionally 
strong eddying currents prevailed in this narrow passage, 
setting up strong intermittent up and down currents, 
involving a certain risk to the pilot attempting the flight. 
Two machines were successful in this special venture but 
they managed in quite different ways. On the day before 
I set out for my long distance flight which took me to 
Rehau, a line squall approached the Wasserkuppe which, 
however, was rather remarkable for failing to show any 
appreciable rising currents. 
Since the general trend of 
the weather, in accordance with the forecast that morning, 
was expected to be favourable several pilots were on the 
qui-vive. Groenhoff on the " Fafnir " was the first to 
be launched, closely followed by Mayer, "Aachen," myself, 
and Kegel bringing up the rear with his " Kassel." We 
all had the intention of carrying out a rainstorm flight. 
Mayer covered a distance of twelve and a half miles (twenty 
kilometres) ; Kegel reached Tann, a distance of nine and a 
half miles (fifteen kilonetres), whilst Groenhoff returned to 
the Wasserkuppe where he came down as the front of the 
line squall failed to provide any lift. 
I, for my part, 
followed the front of the squall towards the Milseburg, 
but changed my programme at once on noticing the lack 
of the required rising currents. After allowing the front 
of the squall to pass O F/-V me I made my way back to the 
Wasserkuppe, flying pvly in the clouds and partly with 
ground visibility grea"! 
-estricted. 
I carried on past the

--- PAGE 415 ---
326 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
Wasserkuppe in order to make an attempt on the Kreuzberg. 
Difficulties were not experienced in effecting the hop across 
the Gersfeld valley. Arriving at the previously mentioned 
pass at the ridge a long struggle began, to reach the necessary 
height for getting across. 
Several times the machine was 
caught in downward eddies causing it to drop suddenly 
one hundred to one hundred and thirty feet (thirty to forty 
metres). After patiently waiting for the right moment I 
slipped across at low altitude reaching the Kreuzberg and 
returning to the pass, where I again had to wait for a 
considerable time before I was able to fly back again to the 
Wasserkuppe.
Five days later the flight was repeated by Groenhoff. 
Owing to the strength of the up-currents under the clouds 
a considerably greater height was reached by him than I 
had been able to attain. Whilst the greatest height I had 
gained in the course of my flight was about six hundred and 
fifty-six feet (two hundred metres) Groenhoff, on his way 
out, went up to about two thousand six hundred and twenty 
feet (eight hundred metres), which sufficed for him to 
reach the Kreuzberg from the Wasserkuppe and to turn 
in one unbroken glide. The exceptionally high aspect 
ratio and the great speed of his " Fafnir " may have assisted 
him in reaching the goal, but on the way back these properties 
of his machine were of lesser advantage. On reaching the 
area of eddying down-currents which had given me all 
the trouble, Groenhoff exhibited all his grit and flying skill 
in a prolonged struggle to get over the top. After several 
attempts he eventually succeeded in passing the obstacle 
and, working his way up to make good a loss in height of 
six hundred and fifty-six feet (two hundred metres) below 
starting level, he landed on the Wasserkuppe after five 
hours, much to the surprise of his comrades. This effort 
is a fine example of what can be achieved even in 
unfavourable circumstances by good judgment, persistence 
and skill.
In view of the ability shown by Groenhoff, Hurttig and 
Mayer in the course of these events, expectation rose to a 
high pitch when favourable flying conditions were forecast 
towards the end of the competitions. On the last day,

--- PAGE 416 ---
8/5. 
TIIK U.F.I). DAGLING. 
A PRIMARY TRATXTXC; 
GLIDER 
BUILT 
BY
R. F. DAGNALL OF GUILDFORD
By courtesy of " Flight "
Facing page 326

--- PAGE 417 ---
86. 
THE " Scrn." 
A BRITISH INTERMEDIATE SOAKING GLIDER. 
BUILT BY 
E. A. ABBOTT. LTD., FARNHAM, AND DESIGNED BY MR. L. E. BAYNES.
By courtesy of " Flight ''
Facing page 327

--- PAGE 418 ---
PROGRESS OF SAILPLANING 
327
August 24th, cumulus formations again appeared in the sky. 
Seeing that I had explained several times the route to the 
Thiiringer Wald as well as the tactics to be adopted, this 
last day was expected to bring very close contests. A large 
number of the machines had been launched fairly early. 
At times there were as many as fourteen machines in the 
air, mostly awaiting a favourable opportunity to head away 
on a distance flight. 
I did not go up myself until after 
lunch, heading away from home after having reached 
barely six hundred and fifty-six feet (two hundred 
metres).
At this time Groenhoff 's machine was still at a fair height 
straight above me. When he saw me starting away he 
stopped soaring around the Wasserkuppe and followed in 
the direction of the Thiiringer Wald. His machine being 
the faster he quickly caught up and forged on ahead. 
I saw him again just before crossing over the most difficult 
point of the route, but he had lost so much height that he 
was forced to give up after covering a little over sixteen 
miles (twenty-six kilometres). The others who had followed 
at the same time in similar conditions were just as unlucky 
as Groenhoff. Hurttig had started a distance flight and 
managed twenty-four and a half miles (39.3 kilometres): 
Mayer reached a distance of nearly twenty-eight and a half 
miles (forty-six kilometres) and would have recorded the 
best performance of the day had I not continued to go 
farther ahead. 
I followed the route I already knew with 
the intention of reaching the Fichtel mountains and of 
crossing them, which in spite of several attempts I had 
hitherto been unable to do. Late in the evening I arrived 
at the foothills of this isolated range. The wind was 
exceedingly weak and I was hardly able to keep in the air. 
A cloud bank, coming up in the direction of the wind, 
finally brought a very weak rising current, at the same time, 
however, enveloping the tops of the mountains in fog. 
Very slowly I gained height, riskily flitting through the 
ragged and low-hanging clouds which glowed with a dark 
red colour in the rays of the setting sun. The lights from 
the shelter huts on the highest point of the Fichtel threw 
a faint glimmer through the misty air as I crossed the

--- PAGE 419 ---
328 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
Fichtel for the first time, passing close under the summit 
of the highest of its mountains. Shortly before landing 
near Markt Redwitz I had a short race with a motor car 
with its headlights glaring into the night and finally a duel 
with an overhead high tension cable which I failed to see 
until the last moment, and then this flight covering a 
distance of ninety-one miles two furlongs, came to an end, 
again deciding the competition in my favour.
The 1930 competition in the Rhon produced particularly 
good performances on the part of the practice pilots. It 
must be regarded as a further achievement that this year's 
performance tests proved the possibility of carrying out 
long distance flights even in comparatively unfavourable 
weather conditions. After all, it is one of the aims of the 
movement to enable as many pilots as possible to put up 
good performances in all kinds of weather conditions.
The Rhon competitions also afforded manifest evidence 
of the friendship which had sprung up between the British 
and German gliding communities. British air and sail- 
planing experts paid us a visit on the Wasserkuppe, giving 
us the opportunity to renew the former acquaintance with 
our friends. Unfortunately a British machine had not 
been entered for the contests. Nevertheless, captains and 
members of various British gliding clubs, accompanied by 
Mr. Gordon England, the Chairman of the British Gliding 
Association, and the Master of Sempill arrived on the spot 
and were received with great enthusiasm. For a few days 
they all shared our " Red Indian " camp life in the " Wild 
Rhon." 
Sir Sefton Brancker in a Puss Moth appeared 
on the scenes of the " Rhon-Olympiad," and those who in 
England had not had the opportunity of admiring and 
appreciating this remarkable personality were now in a 
position to do so. Our British visitors offered the " English 
Visitors' Prize " consisting of a one week's trip to England, 
and I was lucky enough to win this prize by the flight I 
carried out on the last day of the contest, thus enabling 
me to pay a further visit to England, where the British 
gliding community again received me with the most cordial 
hospitality.
Apart from what was being achieved in the Rhon, the

--- PAGE 420 ---
PROGRESS OF SAILPLANING 
329
gliding experts of other countries came more and more 
into the picture.
A spirit of adventure coupled with sporting dare-devilry, 
two well-known traits in Wolf Hirth's character, may have 
induced him to set forth on his journey across the Atlantic, 
taking with him to America his sailplane the " Musterle/' 
and accompanied by Fritz Ackermann, a native of Kassel, 
and the constructor of my own glider, the " Wien." Hirth 
had previously tried to fly to America in a light aeroplane 
via Iceland and Greenland. On reaching Iceland, owing 
to political difficulties, he had been forced to give up his 
attempt.
He made his first American glide on September 2ist, 
during a competition in Elmira, N.Y. Unfavourable 
weather conditions prevailed during the first few days, 
only Hirth and the American, Jack O'Meara, being able 
to stay in the air for more than an hour at a time. The 
wind freshened up, however, during the second week of 
the contest, and better performances were the result.
The machines entered by America, some of which had 
been designed by German experts, proved their worth 
alongside the two German planes, the " Schloss Mainberg " 
of Haller and Hirth's *' Musterle.'' The utility gliders entered 
by Professor Franklin were particularly worthy of note.
Franklin (Ypsilanti, Mich.) was successful in winning 
the point-to-point trial, putting down his machine with 
great accuracy on the finishing line. He also carried out 
several flights of over one hour's duration. Moreover, the 
Franklin machine secured another of the big prizes, winning 
the duration prize when piloted by Hastings (Los Angeles) 
with a flight of seven hours forty-three minutes. This 
was the longest of the many duration flights at which 
Hastings excelled during the competition. Nearly equally 
successful in this department was Eaton (Norwich N.Y.) 
in a Baker-McMillen machine, who, shortly before the end 
of the contest, remained in the air for seven hours twenty- 
three minutes. He had already exceeded five hours once 
before. Jack O'Meara, of Akron, Ohio, in a machine of 
a similar type to Baton's, carried out two flights of six 
hours and two and a half hours respectively, besides a

--- PAGE 421 ---
330 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
great many others exceeding thirty minutes. Apart from 
this he succeeded in a splendid long distance attempt, 
covering ten miles ; on another occasion he reached a 
height of two thousand three hundred and four feet.
One of the competitors was a young sportsman of Pitts­ 
burgh, Gus Haller, who had been in Europe in order to 
gather experience in soaring. Haller had practised in the 
Rhon and there obtained his " C " certificate. When he 
heard that I had gone to England to help the British Gliding 
Association and to give a fillip to the movement in England, 
he packed his bags and followed across the Channel at 
once. From that time he faithfully accompanied me on 
my tours. He was not only of the most valuable assistance, 
but he also picked up the tactics of soaring with the greatest 
facility, a fact that must have helped him on returning to 
his own country. In any case he was the winner of the 
long-distance trial, making two flights, one of twelve and 
three-quarters miles and one of fourteen miles, the latter 
distance being a record for an American in his own country. 
On these occasions he flew the " Schloss Mainberg," which 
had been piloted by Hemmer during the preceding competi­ 
tions in the Rhon. With these two splendid flights he 
secured the first prize in the long distance contest. 
One 
of the finest machines in the contests was the Akron Condor 
glider designed by Franz Gross, a former member of the 
Darmstadt Academy group. With this plane Jack O'Meara 
remained in the air for three and a half hours. Klemperer, 
the former pioneer of soaring in Germany and the present 
pioneer of the sport in the States, was unfortunate enough 
to have a crash, which forced him to retire from further 
participation.
The major share in the prizes, however, was taken by 
Hirth. His distance flight of thirty-one and three quarter 
miles constituted an American record. It was Hirth who 
carried out the greatest number of valid flights during the 
competition, taking off twenty-three times and remaining 
in the air for a period exceeding the half-hour on every 
occasion. He undertook flights of over seven hours' 
duration, reaching heights of three thousand feet. His 
long distance flight was completed by deftly exploiting

--- PAGE 422 ---
PROGRESS OF SAILPLANING 
331
thermal currents. Hirth, whose sociable and sportsmanlike 
ways create friends wherever he goes, was also responsible 
for the idea of providing with food a fellow pilot who was 
up on a duration attempt, which he did by means of a 
three hundred feet fishing line. This method was also 
adopted during Hastings' record glide, and naturally 
soon found favour all round.
Six weeks after the end of this competition the Bowlus- 
Hirth Sailplaning school was founded in New York. 
Here, the ab-initio pupils were taught by the auto-towed 
method. In looking around for a suitable practice spot for 
this school, Hirth eventually, after extended " expeditions " 
in his light aeroplane, discovered the place he was looking 
for at Mount Peter, near Greenwood Lake. Here, on 
February 22nd, an icy cold day, he carried out his first 
soaring flight of two hours seven minutes' duration. The 
following day, accompanied by Jack O'Meara, the towing 
instructor, who used a Franklin glider, he remained in the 
air for four hours seven minutes.
Also about this time the Haller-Hirth Sailplane Corpor­ 
ation was founded in Pittsburgh, Penn., where, under the 
direction of Fritz Ackermann, the design and construc­ 
tion of high efficiency sailplanes on German lines was 
begun.
In every country records and competitions have quickly 
followed each other. A happy sign of the rapid growth of 
the British gliding community was given by the British 
Gliding Meeting on the i8th and igth of October, 
1930. Although the competition was only a small one, 
carried out within a short space of time, it set the example 
for many similar meetings, which have since been held in 
England. Admittedly the achievements did not reach 
the standard of other countries. However, such was not 
the idea of these contests. In Germany we would have 
rather styled them " training competitions." Whoever 
agrees that record performances are not material for future 
progress, but that the spirit of a sporting community is the 
chief thing which counts, will also know how to appreciate 
the comparatively small figures achieved during the com­ 
petition held at the Ditchling Beacon.

--- PAGE 423 ---
332 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
Five prizes had been offered, mostly by firms interested 
in gliding, such as glider and " Dope " manufacturers. 
Unfavourable 
weather 
did 
not permit 
of notable 
performances, and this will explain why the best duration 
flight lasted only four minutes thirty-seven seconds. This 
performance was put up by Capt. Matheson of New Zealand, 
who had just obtained his " C " Certificate on the Wasser- 
kuppe. Further pretty flights were made byStratton in a 
Dagling, by Mole, and also by the Portsmouth " A " Team, 
and the Surrey u B " team. The flights of Matheson, 
who together with the Master of Sempill and Mole was a 
member of the " B " Team of the London Gliding Club, 
greatly contributed to the success of the meeting. The 
British-built machines, which appeared for the first time, 
also did very well.
Proof of the rapid progress of gliding was also provided 
by reports received from Australia to the effect that, even 
in that country, soaring was becoming more and more popular 
after Mr. Pratt had set up an Australian duration record 
on September 2ist by remaining in the air for one hour 
thirty-five minutes.
In France, too, interest in gliding has been revived. 
Auger, who with Abrial had always devoted the closest 
study to the Rhon competitions, managed a soaring flight 
of twenty-eight minutes in his " Rapace," completing a 
closed circuit of eighteen and three-quarter miles whilst 
competing at a meeting in his own country.
Nothing much happened during the winter of 1930-31. 
A good flight by Jack O'Mearawas reported from New 
York, the pilot in his Bowlus sailplane having been towed 
up by an engined aeroplane from North Beach, Long Island, 
to a height of three thousand eight hundred feet on February 
12th. O'Meara then carried out a soaring flight over 
Manhattan. He was caught in a rising gust over the 
East River, lifting him to four thousand feet. After twenty 
minutes he landed on the aerodrome.
The many record-breaking flights carried out during the 
Spring of 1931 began during the first half of March. On 
the tenth of that month Wolf Hirth made a soaring flight 
over New York City. This effort is particularly noteworthy

--- PAGE 424 ---
PROGRESS OF SAILPLANING 
333
in view of the fact that this flight was not carried out by 
means of aeroplane towing, Hirth simply used the hillside 
currents to overcome all the attendant difficulties of this 
type of flight.
Hirth had considered this plan for some time, and had 
carefully prepared his attempt. Having secured definite 
permission from the authorities on the very last day, he 
arrived at the spot he had carefully selected in the course 
of many tours in his engine aeroplane and his motor-car. 
This was a small park between the Hudson and Riverside 
Drive. The New York police force had sent sixty men on 
motor cycles and in cars. Riverside Drive was closed to 
all traffic between i5oth and i7oth street. The available 
space for landing was rather restricted, but Hirth made a 
splendid start, within a short time rising to a height of 
nine hundred feet, so that he would have been able easily 
to glide right along the bank of the river through New York. 
Unfortunately the police withheld their consent for him 
to do this. 
They finally signalled him to come down by 
waving red flags in order to free the roads for the traffic rush 
at the end of business hours. The flight was thus inter­ 
rupted ; nevertheless Hirth had convinced thousands of 
onlookers that soaring is a sport intensely worth cultivating. 
Hirth returned straight to Germany, where he took over 
the sailplaning school of Grunau. Under his able direction 
this school has since developed into one of the foremost 
German establishments of its kind.
Meanwhile the movement in Germany was busily engaged 
in carrying out tests with gliders in tow. The towing of 
motorless aircraft was admittedly not a new thing, the 
well-known stunt pilot Raab having previously demon­ 
strated such flights during aerial displays, after Espenlaub 
had extensively studied the question. Moreover, in the 
preceding year the Rhon-Rossitten Gesellschaft had brought 
out a specially reinforced glider which had been flown by 
Stamer and Groenhoff on the Wasserkuppe. At that time 
I was taking an instructional course for the purpose of 
learning to fly in an ordinary engined machine. The 
" Darmstadter Akademische Fliegergruppe " had also 
initiated trials of towing normal high-efficiency gliders

--- PAGE 425 ---
334 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
behind suitable slow-flying powered machines. These 
tests had turned out satisfactory, so that flying activities 
on the Griesheim aerodrome near Darmstadt developed in 
a rapid manner. The power-driven aeroplane " Flamingo " 
of the Rhon-Rossitten Gesellschaft, a light aeroplane with 
a single engine of no h.p., took in tow alternately the 
" Fafnir " flown by Groenhoff and the Darmstadt gliders. 
A Klemm light aeroplane was also used for this purpose by 
the " Akademische Fliegergruppe." 
The advantage of 
the new method soon became patent, since a great deal of 
training could be put in even within a comparatively short 
space of time. After several short trial and practice flights 
had been made below clouds and along minor line squalls, 
it was hardly surprising that, the weather being favourable, 
on April i3th three of the training machines set out on a 
distance attempt after having been towed up to a height of 
one thousand three hundred feet. The pilots in question 
were Fuchs in the " Starkenburg," Stark in the " Darm­ 
stadt " and Groenhoff in his " Fafnir/' The excellent 
geographical formation of the country along the " Berg- 
strasse " undoubtedly permits flights of between thirty-five 
and forty-five miles being carried out easily, seeing that a 
hilly range of even height extends from Darmstadt to 
Heidelberg. This range had been used by Nehring in the 
course of his trial flights for the one hundred kilometre 
prize. Nehring, however, had to take off under difficult 
conditions from a steep meadow on the lower half of the 
hillside and then work his way up with great skill. Towing 
simplified this troublesome task. However, GroenhofFs 
performance on that particular day was very splendid 
indeed. He succeeded in flying across the big gap separating 
the Odenwald from the Black Forest, and, whilst his fellow 
pilots did not exceed the forty-five miles limit, putting up 
performances something like Nehring's, Groenhoff landed 
not far from Freiburg, after having covered a distance of 
ninety miles.
This unbroken mountain range is also very well suited 
for distance flights to a given objective, though this can be 
done only with the wind blowing in a certain direction. 
On the other hand, being towed up offers the advantage of

--- PAGE 426 ---
PROGRESS OF SAILPLANING 
335
permitting the glider to be taken to suitable weather condi­ 
tions within a short time. In this manner Fuchs succeeded 
on April i5th in working his way along the range right up 
to Heidelberg, and returning to the place whence he started. 
The distance covered was twice thirty-six miles, a perform­ 
ance which surely proves the ability of this soaring pilot. 
Fuchs had taken an active part in the Rhon during the 
early years of the movement. He had also shown his skill 
in ordinary motor-driven aeroplanes, but now has taken 
up gliding again.
This rapid succession of individual performances spoke 
well for the future. In April, Hentschel, a police Lieutenant, 
had carried out a flight of over eleven hours duration at the 
Dornberg near Kassel. All of us were convinced that the 
future would also bring distance flights doubling and trebling 
the figures achieved hitherto. GroenhofFs ability and skill, 
as well as his dare-devilry and pertinacity, were known to 
us all. To those of us who were aware of the fact that 
he had equipped his machine with blind flying instruments 
and that in his capacity as pilot of the Rhon-Rossitten 
Gesellschaft he had carried out towed flights practically 
every day, it was obvious that the next surprise could be 
expected from him.
The meeting of the members of the German Meteoro­ 
logical stations in Munich provided an occasion for demon­ 
strating towed flights. They were undertaken by the 
Rhon-Rossitten Gesellschaft, who sent up Groenhoff in 
the " Fafnir " and Riedel to tow him in the " Flamingo." 
On May 5th about midday they started at Oberwiesenfeld 
and worked up to a height of one thousand three hundred 
and fifty feet. In the rising current below a cloud Groenhoff 
soared to and fro over and in the vicinity of Munich, 
reaching heights of nearly six thousand feet. Meanwhile 
there had appeared in the south a huge perpendicularly 
banked up formation of clouds threatening a thunderstorm. 
For the time being Groenhoff flew towards Schleissheim, 
from where he could see the storm reaching Munich. It 
was difficult for him to recognize the course of the front of 
the squall. Anxious not to lose the opportunity of gaining 
considerable height, Groenhoff without a moment's hesita-

--- PAGE 427 ---
336 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
tion flew straight into the storm, where he was caught 
immediately in a very strong up-current. At the same time 
a terrific hailstorm, accompanied by intermittent squalls, 
began to make matters serious. The hail pierced the thin 
top covering of the plane. Hailstones and rainwater 
accumulated inside the wing. Fortunately Groenhoff 
managed to get out of the danger zone before his wing 
had been completely broken up. Growing more careful, 
he continued to fly in front of the line squall, which had 
now become plainly defined. In this manner he reached 
Regensburg, which he passed flying in a northerly direction. 
Meanwhile he lost touch with the storm, and he was forced 
to work his way up to a height of six thousand six hundred 
feet at the crest of a low-lying hill. This enabled him to 
pick up the storm front again, which now carried him 
across the " Bohmer Wald." As is usual, the storm abated 
towards the evening. Groenhoff saw the valley of the 
Eger beneath him, and having lost height considerably, 
also in view of the fact that darkness was falling, he decided 
to land. The latter part of the glide was again fraught 
with difficulties. Nightfall made it difficult for him to 
see the country below, and the flying qualities of the machine 
had been greatly impaired by the damage. Nevertheless 
a good landing was made, after a flight of eight and a half 
hours, Groenhoff having covered a distance of one hundred 
and sixty miles in motorless flight.
This effort had shown what could be done, even in 
flat country, after a towed start, for the Munich aerodrome 
is situated in the plains of Bavaria. In such places sail- 
planing had not been thought of before. The towed start 
permits high efficiency gliders being used from the ordinary 
aerodrome. This was corroborated by a flight from Berlin 
to Frankfurt on the Oder, by Fuchs on June 2nd. Fuchs, 
who had been demonstrating towed flights in Berlin, 
also started at the right moment in front of a squall. All 
the way the flight took him over flat country until he came 
down at Frankfurt on the Oder, a distance of forty-eight 
miles.
About this time I resumed my own gliding activities. 
Among the sailplane experts who had put up exceptional

--- PAGE 428 ---
PROGRESS OF SAILPLANING 
337
performances I alone had not undergone a flying course 
in motor-driven aircraft, either before or during glider 
training. Not until the winter and spring 1930-31 was 
I given the opportunity of gaining experience in flying 
power aeroplanes. For this reason I did not resume 
my sailplaning flights until the beginning of June, when 
returning from a visit to my British friends. In England 
I had been able to study closely the method of towing by 
car, which had made rapid progress under the able direction 
of Lowe-Wylde.
The importance of this new method was obvious. In 
view of the fact that towing by car is particularly adaptable 
to flat country, and that its advantages become more patent 
where the country lacks suitable hills for soaring, I carried 
out fundamental tests on motor-car and aeroplane towing 
in Munster, Westphalia, where a large aerodrome permitted 
good heights to be attained.
About this time the Rhon-Rossitten Gesellschaft had 
equipped an expedition to the Jungfraujoch in the Swiss 
Alps, with a view to widening the knowledge on the forma­ 
tion of air currents between mountains, such as had been 
gained in the course of the winter of 1928-29 by my soaring 
flights at the Rax-Alpe. The expedition set out at the 
end of May, Groenhoff with his " Fafnir " being one of 
the members.
The lower density of the air at these heights created 
difficulties when taking off. Moreover the deep snow 
prevented the launching team from running. It was 
decided therefore that a team of twenty should form the 
launching crew. These difficulties had also occurred 
during the Rax expedition, when launching had been made 
possible only by stamping down the snow under foot, as is 
done on ski jumps at the beginning and at the end of the 
course. On June loth, when launching the machine from 
the Jungfraujoch, the launching team failed to give the 
glider the necessary initial speed, and Groenhoff slid away 
on the skid at high speed without being able to lift the 
machine into the air. The sailplane nearly crashed down 
a precipice, but at the last moment he managed to take off 
from the ground. Groenhoff now found that his elevator

--- PAGE 429 ---
338 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
was partly out of action. During his slide down the hill 
one half of his elevator being near the ground had been torn 
off, so that its efficiency had been greatly impaired. 
Several 
times the machine got out of control, and the pilot was 
about to make use of his parachute. However, with the 
greatest skill, by rapid flying, Groenhoff managed to 
keep control and finally land safely near Interlaken. 
Besides this unlucky incident, the expedition was not 
favoured by the weather. It was therefore found impossible 
to carry out an extended soaring flight above starting level, 
although Groenhoff made several successful long glides. 
One glide he made, in order to attend a demonstration at 
the aerodrome of Berne, was of particular interest. On 
taking off he utilized the ascending part of the eddy, which 
is set up by south winds on the lee slopes of the mountains. 
After having dived through the down-current he then 
managed to reach the aerodrome by making use of a number 
of clouds.
A Swiss expedition, working on the same area and at 
the same time as the Rhon-Rossitten Gesellschaft, was more 
fortunate. On June nth the Swiss pilot Farner went up 
in the early morning and carefully exploited the currents 
which are known to the mountain expert. For a few 
minutes he sailed over the Guggi glacier, and then took his 
glider to the Grindelwald valley, where he gained one 
thousand five hundred feet in height owing to favourable 
thermal currents. Farner landed after a splendid flight 
of one hour twenty-four minutes duration. On the 
following day Farner launched out again, hoping to use 
the thermal currents over the Lauterbrunn valley. He 
managed to keep his height for twenty minutes after having 
left the start. The Swiss expedition, whose members, 
having grown up in the mountains, were well versed in the 
geographical formation of the country, took two of their 
machines to the Scheidegg, where Baroni and Traxler 
carried out several more beautiful flights. Particularly 
worthy of mention, however, is a splendid flight made by 
Farner, who at the time was quite inexperienced in gliding. 
Flying along Lake Brienz and working his way across the 
Bruning Pass, he managed to cover a distance of 35.4 miles.

--- PAGE 430 ---
PROGRESS OF SAILPLANING 
339
In several instances he had to recover height at various 
slopes. His distance was not far short of GroenhofFs 
thirty-six miles to Berne.
The Swiss novice Soltein carried out the last flight of the 
expedition. Over Interlaken he rose to a height of four 
thousand six hundred feet, probably carried up by thermal 
currents, finally landing after thirty-five minutes.
Both the Swiss and the Rhon-Rossitten expedition 
confirmed the experience made by the Rax expedition. 
In the mountains rising currents are not nearly so active 
as had been assumed. 
Eddies are, however, particularly 
strong. Results are likely to be achieved mainly by using 
thermal currents. Of course, great care and a good know­ 
ledge of the peculiarities of the mountains are necessary 
conditions for successfully carrying out such expeditions. 
As early as during the Rax expedition I had put forward 
the opinion that it ought to be possible to soar permanently 
in the ascending part of the eddy set up on the lee side of 
mountains. This has as yet not been done. In the event 
of another such expedition it certainly would be worth 
while to study these currents and to attempt soaring on that 
side of the mountain where we have hitherto assumed the 
existence only of down-draughts.
Whilst GroenhofF was flying at Jungfraujoch I was 
engaged in preparing the first large scale demonstration of 
soaring over flat country. My intentions were to arrange 
an aerial display in Mlinster on June i4th. In the midst of 
my preparations I heard from London that the Daily 
Mail was offering £1,000 for the first glider to cross the 
English Channel both ways. It was very awkward for me 
to leave Miinster in time. However, on the day before the 
competition was due to begin I arrived at St. Inglevert. 
German and English newspaper reports had led me to 
expect strong competition, for in accordance with German 
reports Groenhoff and Hirth had entered, whilst from 
England Lowe-Wylde, Squadron Leader Probyn with 
Turner, and Flt.-Lt. Findlay with the Lyons Tea machine 
piloted by Krause were expected to arrive in the course 
of the first few days. 
Mr. Lissant Beardmore, whose 
enthusiasm for gliding had been roused by my demonstrations

--- PAGE 431 ---
340 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
in England during the previous year, and who had 
acquired a German high efficiency sailplane of the " Profes­ 
sor " type, was engaged in towed flight tests. For these 
reasons I was convinced that the character of the competition 
would very likely differ in actual practice from what had 
been originally intended. In view of the fact that towed 
flight was to be permitted I was sure that the contest would 
turn out to be a kind of towed flight race, perhaps the first 
one of its kind in the world.
Competitors were allowed to start after noon on Saturday, 
June 2Oth. Owing to unfavourable weather conditions, 
however, nothing could be done until late in the evening. 
Apart from the weather, a difficulty that presented itself 
was the shortness of the available time. The French 
coastal stations reported a strong head wind. The sporting 
attraction of the whole venture was increased by the fact 
that low hanging clouds covered the sky until immediately 
before the start : in addition to this it was impossible to 
await the latest weather reports. Owing to the late hour 
the return flight from Dover Hill had to be undertaken at 
night. Whereas on the way out I had required the whole 
of the nine thousand feet to reach the other side owing to 
the head wind and the down-currents over the English coast, 
I lost only three thousand feet on my way back, so that I 
still had six thousand at my disposal when I again arrived 
on the French side. I landed on the illuminated aerodrome 
of St. Inglevert.

--- PAGE 432 ---
THE ENGLISH CHANNEL FLIGHT
T
HE English newspaper, the Daily Mail, must be given 
the credit of having been the first to direct the interest 
of the public to any extent towards one branch of the 
sport of flying which is gradually assuming a more important 
position—Aeroplane towed flight.
In Miinster, I received information, that the Daily Mail 
had offered a prize for the first double crossing of the 
English Channel in one day. I had to conclude the prepara­ 
tions for my soaring flight on June i4th. On the twentieth, 
the competition was to begin. I also wished to bring my 
new giant sailplane, the " Austria " with me, which would 
have made such a flight possible, even against the wind, 
circumstances which might not have made a crossing possible 
with the " Wien."
On the sixteenth, I attempted the first start with this 
giant bird in Miinster. At that time, I had not yet the 
under carriage which could be dropped, our small Klemm 
aeroplane of 80 h.p. did not, however, get " Austria " into 
the air. In order to overcome the ground friction on the 
skid, we attached a Mercedes lorry by a cable nine hundred 
and eighty feet long, and our small Klemm to a cable three 
hundred and sixty feet long, and thus there came about what 
was probably the first combined auto and aeroplane towed 
start. The machine was then dismantled and packed up, 
and rapidly driven by my friends over the roads of Germany, 
Belgium and France, to St. Inglevert, the aerodrome of 
Calais. It was the Belgian Minister of Transport—Lippens 
—who, in a wonderful manner smoothed over all the 
difficulties during the journey through Belgium. The 
French Embassy in Brussels also did everything to facilitate 
the journey through France.
When we arrived at St. Inglevert, we heard of the prepara­ 
tions in England. Mr. Lissant Beardmore had developed 
an excellent towing device, in which, in the same way as
341

--- PAGE 433 ---
342 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
the Americans, he had fastened the cable round a cable 
drum on a power-driven aeroplane, and could thus regulate 
the length of the cable. He had also provided telephonic 
communication between the aeroplane and the sailplane. 
Beardmore was at this time at Lympne, and we met there 
when I flew over with the Klemm in order, as quickly as 
possible to ascertain the possibilities of landing in England. 
Hans Werner Krause had been flying for the Lyons Company 
during the whole summer. In consultation with me, the 
latter had arranged gliding demonstrations over the whole 
of England ; whereby, on the one hand, the English gliding 
movement was given a really good stimulus, and, on the 
other hand, the Lyons Company had received a large amount 
of publicity. As a towing aeroplane, the Lyons people 
had a Moth with Flt.-Lt. Max Findlay, chief instructor of 
National Flying Services, Ltd., as pilot. Mr. Lowe-Wylde 
had even brought out his excellent B.A.C. VII, but it was 
particularly unfortunate that his towing aeroplane was not 
ready until it was too late. On June i8th, Mr. Turner had 
been towed to an altitude of ten thousand feet by Squadron 
Leader Probyn, Commanding Officer of the Royal Air 
Force Station at Hawkinge, with his " Westland Widgeon " in 
forty-five minutes. Turner then managed a glide lasting 
thirty minutes.
After the publicity in the papers, Wolf Hirth and Giinter 
Groenhoff were also expected to arrive. 
We expected 
their machines any moment.
An exact programme was made out by the British Gliding 
Association, who were responsible for the management of 
the competition. The towing cable had to be slipped two 
miles inland. 
Barographs had to be taken. 
Noon 
on Saturday, June aoth, was arranged as the earliest time 
for starting. On the previous day, Mr. Beardmore started 
from Lympne with his " Professor," in tow of an Avro 504!^. 
He had not warned the B.G.A. of his start, so that he 
could not be observed. His official start at Lympne was 
given as 5.30 p.m., and his landing time at St. Inglevert 
was 6.03 p.m. Beardmore announced that he had been 
towed to a height of twelve thousand feet, and had then 
flown free over the Channel. He was lucky with his flight,

--- PAGE 434 ---
87. 
THE R.F.D. SAILPLANE. 
Span 14.G metres. 
BUILT BY R. F. DAGNALL OF GUILDFORD AND DESIGNED BY J. HEWSIIEU.
Facing page 31:2

--- PAGE 435 ---
88. 
Tin-: HroK SOAKING PLANE " AUSTRIA," IN FLIGHT
I-\uin° 
a",c 
"> li!

--- PAGE 436 ---
THE ENGLISH CHANNEL FLIGHT 
343
in that he had the most beautiful weather and a strong 
following wind. As he had flown without official observation 
and before the commencement of the competition, I assumed 
that he—as also Turner—had crossed over to start in the 
competition under the same conditions as the others. It 
is a pity that he did not do so. A victory in the general 
competition, sponsored by the B.G.A., would have been 
acclaimed enthusiastically.
Early on the morning of June aoth, all participants were 
on the spot. The last remnant of work on the machines 
was being done feverishly, in order to be quite ready for 
the official start of the competition at twelve o'clock.
The sporting character of the flight has frequently been 
falsely estimated. On the basis of its programme, the 
flight was, and will always remain, the first combined towed 
and gliding race in the world. The sporting value was 
different to that of a normal soaring flight. With the latter, 
the skill of the pilot and his machine are of supreme 
importance : with power-driven flights, the skill of the 
pilot, the quality of the machine and engine : with a 
combined towed and gliding flight, all these conditions are 
lumped together. Even towed flying has its difficulties, 
and must be learned. The Daily Mail Prize showed this for 
the first time by its great publicity. Later, we often 
experienced it.
The B.G.A. observers were on the spot, as were also 
Turner and Krause ; but the weather was bad. The 
tension increased towards 11.30, as the pilots had their 
machines brought out on to the ground. In spite of every 
endeavour to find a gap through the wall of clouds by 
sending an aeroplane along the coast, a start was impossible. 
Both Flt.-Lt. Findlay and Krause, as well as Weichelt and I, 
who had made a reconnaissance with our aeroplanes, had to 
abandon the idea of starting, because the clouds were 
everywhere too low. During the afternoon, it cleared 
slowly, and the weather reports from the English coastal 
stations reported a diminution in the strong adverse wind 
which had been reported earlier.
Towards 5 p.m. a slight nervousness showed itself in 
the various groups. The initiated could feel that preparations

--- PAGE 437 ---
344 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
for a start were being made in the hangars. 
Actually, 
the Moth of the Lyons group was brought out and was 
taxying along the ground. Almost immediately, Krause's 
helpers brought out his machine. Hardly was it erected 
on the starting place, than the " Wien " was hurried past 
it, to take up a position behind the u Klemm," which was even 
more quickly brought out. The race started. As a result 
of my towing machine being weaker by 30 h.p., I was at a 
very great disadvantage as compared with Krause, and this 
was at once evident. The towing cable was attached. 
Two men pulled in the centre to assist ; two others were 
at the wing tips of the " Klemm." 
The throttle was opened 
wide. The " Wien " followed slowly. Then sliding more 
and more quickly it rose and soon followed the still taxying 
aeroplane into the air. The start went off excellently. 
Slowly we flew straight ahead, then made a wide turn and 
climbed higher. Krause only got this far five minutes later. 
His more powerful towing aeroplane then made itself 
felt and I saw the machines underneath us coming closer 
with extraordinary rapidity. Weichelt, usually so calm, 
signalled to me from the front out of the " Klemm " that we 
had risen six hundred to nine hundred feet above the 
Lyons p