that we often attain a speed of sixty miles an hour. 
In the same way that we lose height on the passages across 
the gaps when flying over slopes, we lose it also when we 
fly under the gaps between the clouds and are compelled 
to work up again as soon as they are crossed. 
Our whole 
power of vision is now adjusted to cloud mountains and 
valleys and the changing shapes of the upwinds caused by these.
So far this is all very useful and helpful. But unfortu­ 
nately cloud mountains, unlike their brethren on the solid 
earth, have the peculiarity of springing into existence very 
suddenly, and, what is worse, dissolving with equal

--- PAGE 281 ---
216 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
rapidity. Everyone who has flown across country with the 
clouds must have suffered from the behaviour of these 
misleading fellows. If you are very lucky at the moment 
of leaving your hillside you run into a cloud that is in process 
of formation. You see above you a tiny wisp of vapour, 
which all in a moment rises and grows blacker, and before 
you know where you are it has become a huge cloud. The 
upwind beneath it is very strong, so that you can fly with 
it for miles.
But often it is another story. Suspecting no evil, you 
have been flying across an interesting country that stretched 
in a broad expanse beneath you. The base of your cloud 
was so high that you sped along at a good six thousand feet 
above the earth. Suddenly you find yourself dropping. 
You look up and see your beautiful, round cloud crumpling 
up and acquiring ragged edges. That is a bad sign, but 
you have little time for reflection, for almost instantly the 
cloud that one moment ago was so stately disappears 
and leaves you hanging forlornly between heaven and earth. 
If you have not already considered carefully what to do in 
such a case, there will be nothing for it but a more or less 
long and unhappy gliding flight down to the plain below.
Clouds disperse above great upwind areas and high 
mountains, and frequently also above wide, extensive flat 
plains and sheets of water or rivers. Moreover, cloud for­ 
mations generally break up towards evening, but the worst of 
it is that it has not yet been possible to discover any reliable 
rules for their behaviour. Therefore the pilot who desires 
to fly safely will do best not to trust himself to cloud upwind 
alone.
A skilled combination of flying under clouds and along 
mountain sides will produce the best results attainable 
by the present methods of cloud flight. 
In this respect 
the slope becomes not only a starting place but also a point 
of support and repose between cloud flights. The elevations 
reached in cloud flying are so far greater than those to which 
we have become accustomed on the slopes, that they render 
possible easy flights to far off mountain ranges. When 
flying over slopes, we must always be on the look out 
for good places for forced landings, so, and in similar

--- PAGE 282 ---
DISTANCE FLIGHT TO A FIXED POINT WITH RETURN TO STARTING POINT BY CLOUD SOARING
NOTE : 
NOT TO UE DONE r.v SLOPE SOAKING ALONE
6300
,•5600
2-100
58.
SLOPE UPWIND
g——. <
Q£JUD UPWIND
SLOPE 
UPWND
DIRECTION OF FLIGHT PARALLEL TO THAT OF THE WIND
-1AOO
Facing page 21H

--- PAGE 284 ---
CLOUD AND THUNDERSTORM SOARING 
217
fashion, when circling beneath the clouds, we must keep 
in our mind's eye some helpful slope to which we can fly 
if the cloud beneath which we are hanging should suddenly 
disperse when there is no other within reach. We must then 
push ourselves down in a glide to the mountains and 
hover there till another cloud comes along that will bear 
us onwards.
If the clouds are drifting high enough, it is easy to 
reach a chosen goal which does not lie directly in the line 
of their course, for the height attained will enable us to 
fly to hills which lie at an angle to that course.
This fact is of great importance for flights to distant 
fixed objectives and has indeed placed such flights upon an 
entirely different basis. Our experiences of slope soaring 
have taught us that in flights to a distant fixed goal it is 
necessary for the main ridge of the mountains to lie at 
right angles to the direction of the wind. In cloud flying 
this is not necessary ; we can carry out a flight, in which 
both start and finish are exactly in the direction of the wind. 
Only in this case both hillsides must be suitable for slope 
flying and so offer us a chance of waiting for the approach 
of the right cloud. It is also very important to know the 
exact distance of the different mountain ranges from each 
other. When we are gliding above a slope we can always 
see the clouds approaching while they are still a long way 
off, and we generally know the wind velocity by our measur­ 
ing instruments. If in addition we also can estimate the 
distance of the mountains above which the ondrawing cloud 
is piled, it is not difficult to calculate when we may expect 
its arrival. This is of great importance for the return 
flight from objective to starting point.
Sometimes we can attain so great a height under a cloud 
above the starting slope that we can do the journey both ways 
in a single glide, but this is only possible when the clouds 
are very high and the distance from start to finish not too 
great. The surest way is always to rise high above the 
starting slope and then fly to the goal with a cloud ; there 
we should wait until a cloud upwind permits us to climb 
once more and then fly back safely, while constantly 
hugging the clouds.

--- PAGE 285 ---
2i8 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
From the above remarks the value of these new possi­ 
bilities for a flight along a course will be clear. The 
special advantage of the new form of flying lies in the 
increasing number of combinations to which it opens up 
the way. We can now spring from slope to slope, from 
slope to cloud, from cloud to slope or from cloud to cloud.
Soaring, which formerly was closely bound to slopes, is 
now almost set free from them.
And not only can we fly under the clouds ; we can also 
fly in and over them.
Let us first try to force our way into a cloud. 
Sometimes 
this is quite easy, but often enough there are difficulties. 
Generally the upwind under a cloud is divided stepwise ; 
at each stage we climb quickly for a long time ; then we 
find ourselves hanging in a layer in which we make little 
progress. But soon the rapid climb recommences.
The last step we have to climb is the base of the cloud. 
As, rising upward, we enter the cloud, we are met on its 
threshold by stormy gusts, and matters become worse when 
we are really inside, for the rounded mountains of the 
clouds, the wonderful dragons and other fantastic figures 
which children see in them, are caused by the motions of 
the masses of air within each cloud.
Even for old and experienced motor-plane pilots flights 
inside the clouds form a difficult problem. When an 
empty space is dark, no one in it can see ; everywhere there 
is nothing but blackness. These are the conditions that 
a pilot encounters in clouds, with this one difference, that 
the space is not black but white, and in this whiteness you 
can see just as little as in the dark. He who has failed to 
train his flying sense and powers of observation of flight 
conditions in good time will surely be found wanting, for 
one important thing is lost to us :—the horizon line.
%< Flying blind " needs practice. Most soarers have not 
at their disposal the variety of instruments with which the 
motor-pilots are provided. 
Often, too, the dampness of 
the cloud interiors causes the speedometer to strike work, 
in which case our sole resource is to fly by ear—by exact 
attention to the well-known, regular tones of the bracing 
wires. And now all that we have previously learnt fully

--- PAGE 286 ---
DISTANCE FLIGHT TO A FINED POINT WITH RETURN TO STARTING POINT BY SLOPE FLYING
R. KRONPQJ)
59.
COURSE OF FLIGHT AT A RIGHT-ANGLE TO DIRECTION OF WIND
Facing page -IS

--- PAGE 288 ---
CLOUD AND THUNDERSTORM SOARING 
219
proves its uses—the more or less well developed feeling 
for the wind in our faces and the sensitive handling of the 
controls are a powerful help in such times of trouble. We 
are also conscious of the forces which make for increased 
speed, and find ourselves frequently seeking assurance 
that the steering parts are in their normal positions.
Even when we are in really good training and practice, 
mistakes cannot be avoided from time to time when flying 
in machines of a low degree of inherent stability. The 
violent gustiness within the clouds, far surpassing anything 
to which we are accustomed outside them, together with 
the bad visibility, tends to make us over-pull, and then there 
is the danger of a spin. It is typical of blind flying that we 
frequently do not notice such a fatality ; we may be right 
in a spin and merely ascribe the increased whistling of the 
bracing wires to an increase of speed. We then imagine 
that we have pushed too much, and so pull, with the 
result that we spin more wildly than ever. There is, 
however, one means of knowing whether we are spinning, 
for if we pull when in a spin the speed either remains 
stationary or increases. On the other hand, if we have 
pushed the stick too much, the pull back will immediately 
cause the whistling in the wires to decrease.
The decisive factor for success in cloud flying must 
always be the coolness of the pilot. He must depend 
entirely upon his machine and trust it fully. 
By reason of 
its inherent stability it always rights itself even after heavy 
squalls. The pilot is more or less a sleeping partner in 
such cases ; he must sense what his machine wants to do, 
and try to follow its lead. It is more important to save 
the machine from overstrain by skilful steering than to 
impose one's own will upon it under all circumstances.
A flight in the clouds requires special caution. The 
soarer whose plane is not constructed to meet the heavy 
demands clouds make on it should always carry a parachute. 
Even if it is not needed, the moral effect is a good one. 
While the plane is groaning and crackling in every joint, 
the pilot feels safe and can preserve his equanimity.
When flying over a slope it may be observed that the 
machine always turns of itself towards the strongest gusts

--- PAGE 289 ---
220 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
and seems to seek out those spots where the steadiest 
currents are to be found. Usually it is not possible in 
slope flying to surrender oneself to this " intelligence of the 
machine/' but in a cloud upwind it is the very best thing to 
do. Deliberately we let the plane go its own way ; it 
discovers for itself the places with the strongest wind and 
brings us suddenly from blindness into the light. When 
soaring in the clouds, our aim is to climb steeply within 
them so that we may at last pass through them and fly 
above the cloud ocean. The rest is easy. We see once 
more the horizon and the places where a strong upwind 
blows. Upwinds are generally to be found immediately above 
the clouds and their strength depends on the size of the cloud. 
We circle over them, push on to the next cloud peak and so 
fly onward. Now there are no difficulties ; soaring above 
clouds is much easier than soaring above a hillside or even 
in the clouds. The one thing which might perhaps be 
called a difficulty is the problem of keeping in touch with 
the earth. We have to get our bearings through small 
gaps in the clouds, and it would hardly be possible to carry 
out a flight above the clouds profitably without a compass 
and careful calculation made in accordance with a pre­ 
conceived plan. But even if we have thought out every­ 
thing carefully, measured the height, ascertained the wind's 
speed and calculated its course, this method still remains the 
best, for it is the one which bears us highest while leaving 
us always free to drop down through holes between the 
clouds, fly under their bases or to complete a flight over a 
hillside.
The kind of weather necessary for cloud flying is often 
at hand, so that it is generally possible to indulge in this 
highly interesting variety of flight quite frequently. We 
know of only one form of soaring which is superior to it 
both as a sport and in grandeur : 
Thunderstorm flying.
Primitive man was not the only person who found 
thunderstorms weird and terrifying. They are to a certain 
extent a revelation of the forces of nature, but this fact does 
not disturb the trained flyer. He does not worry about 
thunder and lightning ; quite dryly and practically he 
considers the meteorological processes which give rise to

--- PAGE 290 ---
CLOUD AND THUNDERSTORM SOARING 
221
such storms. Especially suitable for soaring are " thunder­ 
storm fronts."
These " fronts " consist of cold air that pushes itself 
under warm air. While the cold air moves forward, rolling 
slowly over the earth like honey spilt upon a table, the great 
thunder clouds are formed in the dividing layer between 
the cold and the warm air, and, with the cold air front, 
stretch out to form a long line.
From a mountain it is particularly easy to watch the 
approach of a thunderstorm. Here, as in cloud soaring, it is 
advisable to obtain as much height above the hillside as is 
possible. The forces of the approaching front will soon 
begin to make themselves felt, and as in cloud soaring, we 
suddenly find ourselves climbing strongly, or we become 
aware of upwind over spots where there was formerly none. 
Now is the time to travel with the storm, but one strict 
rule must be observed : always keep in advance of it. 
If we take this rule to heart, we need have no fear in the 
presence of this most glorious spectacle of nature. Again 
and again the lightning flash may light up the gloomy 
cloud-wall which draws ever nearer, and the thunder may 
roar as mightily as it will, but the soarer will hasten on 
before them both.
It is not always possible to start before the storm front 
at the right moment. But even if we miss it, thunderstorm 
soaring is possible, though with increased precautions. 
Very often the wind drops before the beginning of a squall 
or dies away altogether. It is out of the question to start 
in this " calm before the storm."
In order to leave the slope we must watch keenly for 
the sudden, sharp beginning of the thunder squall, and when 
this comes it is an affair of seconds. He who starts one 
moment too late will find himself caught in a true witch's 
cauldron of thunderstorm eddies and gusts, which may be 
most dangerous for plane and pilot if they occur close to 
the slope and before any great height has been gained. With 
the squall comes heavy rain or even hail, and immediately 
afterwards great masses of cloud generally drift low and 
shroud the mountains in mist while they unload themselves 
on the earth beneath.

--- PAGE 291 ---
222 
KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
The start must be made between the dropping of the 
wind and the moment when the rain begins. The best 
plan is to sit ready in the machine, with the starting crew 
at the rope. The anemometer will indicate the moment 
when the wind has attained the speed necessary for our 
flight, and then we must not lose a second in starting our 
flight before the storm.
At its commencement we must gain height as quickly 
as possible, at the same time keeping the machine well 
ahead of the storm. We are not yet very high, so that the 
ground can still influence our flight, and if we possibly can, 
we must avoid mountains which produce downwind. As 
we rise, it becomes less and less necessary to trouble ourselves 
about the contours of the earth below us, but all the more 
must we study those of the thunderstorm. Quite suddenly 
small, or even fairly large clouds appear in advance of the 
front, and it requires sharp attention to avoid being 
enveloped in one of these. The nearer the wall of cloud 
draws to us, the more rapidly we rise, and the more difficult 
grows the struggle with eddies and gusts. To tack before 
the front as we do before a hillside, or to circle as we do 
in normal cloud flying, is impossible before a thunder­ 
storm front, which is, however, generally so far-flung that 
we can fly right along it in the direction we have chosen. 
But when we are not quite clear as to which direction will 
help us most on our chosen course, we must be very careful 
not to fly too far at first.
If, by steady climbing, we succeed in reaching a sufficient 
height to enable us to see over the storm, the second period 
of the flight begins. This is known as the period of 
orientation, and the higher we are for it, the better. Along 
the whole front strong up winds prevail. On the boundary 
between cold and warm air the storm discharges its artillery 
of thunder and lightning, while its front stretches in the 
form of a nebular roller which we can see beneath us along 
its whole extent. There are now two things that we must 
observe : the line of the front and the direction in which it 
is travelling. It is easy to distinguish the line of the white 
cloud roller below us, but hard to say in which direction, 
from the standpoint of our starting place, it will expand

--- PAGE 292 ---
CLOUD AND THUNDERSTORM SOARING 
223
the furthest. The best thing to do is to fly along it and 
endeavour to ascertain in which direction our greatest 
flight possibilities are likely to develop.
The whole front strides forward. From the speed at 
which the whole moves we can discover where its centre lies, 
because its motion is the rapidest. In order to calculate 
this we must so manoeuvre our machine until it circles 
perpendicularly above a spot on the front of the white 
cloud roller, across which we take our bearings of the 
country directly below us. And now for the first time we 
obtain an accurate impression of the forward movement of 
the cloud masses. If we know the distance on the map 
between the two places across which the storm is driving 
and note by means of a stop-watch how long it takes to fly 
from one to the other we at once have the velocity of the 
storm. If we repeat these calculations from various 
points, it is not difficult to discover the place at which the 
storm front is moving most rapidly. When a thunderstorm 
dies down after the atmospheric energies have adjusted 
their balance, then this part of the front which is its true 
head, pushes on farthest, while the outside edges drop back 
or dissipate.
Strong is the upwind in a thunderstorm, but the down­ 
wind that follows it is equally vigorous. Yet if we are high 
enough up we can easily distinguish the two sides of the 
storm. Before the storm on the upwind side we see 
the land still bathed in sunshine, directly beneath us is the 
white roller, and behind it lying in gloom and often shrouded 
in thick black vapour, we see the downwind side. The 
rain slants down behind the thunderstorm wall, and only 
occasionally can we distinguish through its dark blue veil 
the villages and roads that lie beneath us. That is the side 
that we must resolutely avoid.
The whole art of thunderstorm flying consists in keeping 
above or in advance of the storm front. This would not 
be at all difficult if the front always remained orderly and 
presented a straight edge, but it frequently occurs that 
thunderstorms split and the two halves go off in different 
directions. And now the difficulty is to recognize which 
of them is the stronger, the more vital and the more likely

--- PAGE 293 ---
224 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
to travel farthest. Moreover, two such separated thunder­ 
storms may meet again, or may be held up singly in mountain 
valleys, so it is not too easy to obtain a correct impression. 
In spite of this we can always recognize the upwind side 
by the forms and composition of the clouds, for where the 
air current rises, new white cloudlets are constantly created 
and hang like clusters of grapes before the storm as they 
climb upwards. These are the best indicators of the upwind, 
and as long as we keep above them we shall be able to soar. 
By the aid of long-drawn thunderstorm fronts travelling 
at a great pace it is possible to carry out magnificent feats 
of cross country flying. If our observation flight has 
enabled us to study satisfactorily the line of the front, we 
can now begin our real cross country flight. Immediately 
above the storm, where we have remained till now on 
account of the better bird's eye view this position affords, 
it is generally very gusty, and it may also chance that 
mighty towers of cloud rear themselves up to our height 
from the roller. They are often so high that it is impossible 
to fly over them, while to fly round behind the storm 
would bring us into downwind. While soaring across 
country with a thunderstorm it is therefore best to maintain 
an oblique position before its front, as we are thus able 
to regulate the height at which we desire to fly above the 
ground. If we fly far before the front, it may easily happen 
that the altimeter will register a slight loss of height, but 
this is of no consequence, for if we fly onward we find that 
the plane does not continue to sink but remains floating 
at a certain level. The farther we hasten on in front, the 
lower will be the level at which we can remain, which is 
very advantageous under certain circumstances. On close, 
thundery days it is often difficult to get the view of the 
ground necessary for purposes of orientation from any 
considerable elevation, but if we drop down we can make 
intelligent use of our maps. Moreover, there are no gusts 
in this zone, which is several miles ahead of the front. 
We float tranquilly along in much the same way as we 
fly overland in a light power-driven machine ; if we lose 
too much height, we drop back towards the storm wall 
and immediately begin to rise again.

--- PAGE 294 ---
CLOUD AND THUNDERSTORM SOARING 225
The finest thing about thunderstorm flying is that it 
affords us the best means of rendering ourselves entirely 
independent of the hill slopes. Often it is unnecessary 
to fly backwards and forwards or tack before the slope ; 
we just fly straight out, without the slightest turn, along the 
front of the roller. We are sky-high above the slope, which 
has lost all its influence on us ; as long as the storm travels 
and as far as it extends, we can travel with it.
Nevertheless the very finest flight possibilities are to be 
obtained by a skilful combination of all the various forms 
of flight. It is easy to imagine how we may take advant­ 
age of all the different kinds of soaring on a single 
flight.
The pilot starts from a hillside slope, having flown along 
it as far as he can. At the end of it he waits till the chance 
comes to fly under a cloud to the next mountain range which 
is no great distance away. From this he flies off again, 
and soon finds himself confronted by a great gap which it is 
impossible to cross unless he can gain height considerably. 
This he does by waiting for a mighty cloud, which he climbs 
through ; he then flies with and above it over the broad plain 
to his next point of support. If he has started off on a day 
on which the weather forecast indicates the probability 
of a thunderstorm, he has hit upon the very happiest 
conditions for long distance flight which can possibly be 
expected from our present knowledge of soaring flight. 
If he actually succeeds in getting into contact with the 
thunderstorm and in flying with it across country, and if he 
is capable of steady endurance, then this flight is bound to 
develop into a prodigious exploit. It is often possible 
to spend a whole day in the plane by making use of the 
successive changes in the weather conditions.
We see how the methods of high efficiency soaring flight 
have been built up by experience gained in endurance 
flights, slope soaring, cloud flying and thunderstorm flying, 
and we must learn to take advantage of all these, singly and 
in combination, according to our needs. The possibilities 
of these various kinds of flying, particularly as regards cloud 
and thunderstorm flights, are by no means completely 
exhausted. 
By making use of our present knowledge of
Q

--- PAGE 295 ---
226 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
them, we can already plan to fly for many hundreds of miles, 
at a height of thousands of feet above the earth.
By the vast increase in skill and efficiency which they have 
brought with it cloud and thunderstorm flying has raised 
soaring flight far above the mere sport of its infancy on 
mountain slopes into the region of difficult scientific aerial 
research work. 
Such a flight as the one I have described 
above is not merely a struggle that brings out and develops 
the virile qualities in a man, but is also an enterprise and an 
adventure where new problems are constantly offered for 
solution.
He who has made high efficiency flights in thunderstorms 
and with clouds knows well that there are forces which will 
not yield to horse-power. Victory over the mightiest 
forces of nature can only be obtained by wisdom, courage 
and thought.

--- PAGE 296 ---
AUTO AND AEROPLANE TOWING
T
HE methods of instruction employed for pupils learn­ 
ing to glide and soar along slopes are known in their 
homeland as the " classic school/' but in other 
countries they are often termed the " German school " 
after the land where soaring flight was brought to its present 
standard.
Nevertheless, deductions made from practical experience 
and theoretical study impel us to answer in the negative any 
questions as to the likelihood of these methods remaining 
unaltered in the near future. Experts and amateurs alike 
are gradually inclining to the opinion that the future of 
soaring flight is linked with auto and aeroplane towing. A 
critical survey of the problem will show why this view has 
gained ground.
The pupil's preparation for soaring is gliding, but, as a 
glide involves a constant loss of height, an elevated starting- 
point is a primary essential. Such points are found in the 
hills and from the slopes of these gliding is done. The 
machines are launched from the slope into the air by means 
of " live catapults " in the form of starting crews, who pull 
on rubber shock-absorber cords.
This catapult start involves certain educational diffi­ 
culties, because the principle of all systematic instruction 
lies in graded progress from simple to difficult tasks. In 
a catapult start this principle is reversed.
Old, experienced pilots of power-driven machines have 
told me that every catapult start gives them " a bit of a 
thrill." This expression was used to me by a professional 
pilot who had to make catapult starts in power-driven aero­ 
planes from ships, and a process that provides thrills for a 
professional pilot is surely a wrong one for pupils who 
are only just beginning to acquire the art of flight.
The swift start causes such excitement to the beginner 
(whose nerves are generally in a state of tension at the mere
227

--- PAGE 297 ---
228 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
prospect of flying) that it robs him temporarily of all power 
of thought. I have noticed the fact that the experienced 
pilot of a power-driven aeroplane who takes a course of 
gliding undergoes precisely the same sensations in this 
respect as the raw novice, and although the dangers atten­ 
dant on this state of " paralyzation" (as it is sometimes 
exaggeratedly termed) have been overstated, there is no 
doubt that they frequently lead to crashes which retard the 
pupil's instruction, the cause of the mishaps being mainly 
due to another feature of the " classical school/' i.e. the 
sudden acceleration of the machine. The rubber cable 
endows it temporarily with power sufficient to sustain in the 
air a large-sized power-driven aeroplane.
There is no great danger attached to this method, provided 
that the pupil reacts correctly and keeps his stick in the 
position indicated by his instructor for the moments of the 
start. If, however, he fails to do so, the combination of fast 
speed and the check administered to his thinking powers 
are likely to place him in a perilous situation because the 
speed makes the controls so sensitive that the slightest 
movement will suffice to endanger the glider's stability. 
Frequently the sudden acceleration causes the pupil to slip 
on his seat ; unconsciously he pulls the stick too far back 
as his body tilts, and the result is a bad stall. The whole 
process is purely a matter of reaction to the shock ; as he 
goes over, the pilot involuntarily grasps at the stick to steady 
himself and so pulls it too far back.
This difficulty soon became apparent to the men who 
developed the starting methods at present in use, and they 
tried to obviate them by a compromise. They knew that 
pupils were likely to endanger their machines by this 
tendency to stall ; accordingly they evolved a machine 
of a type that would give the minimum reaction to any 
excessive operation of the controls. This machine was the 
" Zogling," which possesses inherent stability and under­ 
sized control surfaces ; the pupil can therefore commit a 
very large number of errors without imperilling his machine. 
As a matter of fact the " Zogling " flies best when it is 
launched into the air with locked controls—as though it 
were a model. On account of the numerous crashes likely

--- PAGE 298 ---
AUTO AND AEROPLANE TOWING 
229
to occur, its construction is kept as simple as possible, 
while for the same reason it is fitted with an open seat, 
which the pilot may not find exactly comfortable but which 
will minimize the risk of injury to him from splinters in 
the case of a crash.
This was the only possibility of solving the many difficult 
problems arising from the catapult start, but disadvantage­ 
ous consequences soon manifested themselves. When the 
pupil overcame the shock of his start after a number of 
flights and began to react consciously, he found himself 
compelled to make very pronounced movements of his stick 
to steer the machine. This was invariably the case when 
he wanted to put it into a turn, and even more so when he 
tried to bring it out again. In fact, pilots who had learnt to 
fly on a " Zogling " acquired a very rough manner of 
operating the controls, and it was not surprising that 
students of gliding flight who subsequently changed over to 
power-driven aircraft fell into their instructors' bad books 
on account of their tendency to over-control sensitive 
aeroplanes. This difficulty was overcome by bringing out 
another type of machine which forced the " Zogling " 
pupils to acquire a more delicate touch. 
This was called 
the " Priifling," and was later replaced by the improved 
type known as the " Falke."
Undoubtedly the " Priifling " succeeded in producing 
pilots with a more delicate touch, but much time was 
wasted when the pupil changed over from one machine to 
the other, while the cost of his education was naturally 
increased by the expenses involved in the construction and 
maintenance of both these different types. As a rule, the 
smaller flying clubs were unable to afford the expenses of 
a second machine and tried to circumvent the difficulty by 
remodelling their " Zoglings " in a fashion that would 
improve them aerodynamically and render them capable of 
soaring flight. The only result was that their pilots grew 
rougher than ever on the controls as they gained experience.
The peculiarities of a mountain climate, with its frequent 
fogs and mists, were further difficulties for the pupils who 
learnt to fly in mountainous districts. Another cause of 
trouble was the fact that very few mountains had suitable

--- PAGE 299 ---
230 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
slopes for beginners to practise on unless the wind was 
blowing in one particular direction ; consequently pro­ 
longed investigations had to be undertaken all over the 
country before the clubs discovered favourable flying areas. 
When they succeeded in doing so, they generally found that 
the best slopes lay at great distances from the thickly- 
populated districts containing the towns from which their 
pupils were recruited. The latter were forced to make long 
journeys to their schools, with the result that instruction 
became the privilege of those favoured ones who were in a 
position to spare the time for it. On an average a pupil 
needs at least three months' instruction before his training 
can be said to be complete.
In a mountainous district the pupil finds himself con­ 
stantly obliged to give a hand in helping to carry the 
machine from place to place. Undoubtedly he benefits 
from this manual labour, but at the same time it must be 
remembered that most of the pupils in a flying school are 
physically strong specimens and that, after all, the aim 
of the school is to impart instruction in flying to strong and 
weak alike. From a practical point of view the more a 
school can limit its activities to the actual work of flying and 
the less it has to burden its pupils with irksome but necessary 
tasks outside this work, the happier will be the results it 
achieves. There are athletic clubs which will be of better 
service to those desirous of improving their physique. It 
is certain that the physical hardships connected with a course 
of gliding have often deterred individuals who might have 
developed into skilled pilots.
All these factors combined to produce the result that in 
Germany (its homeland) soaring flight became a monopoly 
of the younger generation in general and the students in 
particular. The university student generally has a long 
summer vacation in which he can devote three or four 
months to a complete course of flying, and thus a strong 
line of demarcation has arisen between gliding and soaring 
flight, and those other forms of sport which can be pursued 
in the vicinity of a large town at week-ends or on half- 
holidays and in the summer evenings of week-days. The 
inhabitants of flat, lowlying districts are practically excluded

--- PAGE 300 ---
Cic
t
h— 
C/-
H
K"
V
C
*r 
t
tc c
t- 
cr

--- PAGE 301 ---
FLYING ALONG A 
THUNDERSTORM FRONT
9000 l
1. COURSE OF THE STORM FRONT
2. CONSEQUENT COURSE OF FLIGHT
6000
S&BSiiSS&aii^^
61.
Facing page 231

--- PAGE 302 ---
AUTO AND AEROPLANE TOWING 
231
from any participation in soaring flight, as may be seen from 
the fact that those of them who acquired " Zoglings " and 
attempted to found schools of gliding in the plains were 
generally compelled to abandon their efforts.
Soaring flight thus acquired the reputation of being a 
sport suitable only for mountainous districts where favour­ 
able conditions were available. Here we have the great 
obstacle to its popularization as a national sport, because 
humanity is mainly settled in the world's plains, where it is 
difficult to find favourable flying areas within easy reach.
In the infancy of soaring flight there was one strong 
argument in favour of imparting instruction on the slopes 
of mountains and high hills. As long as true soaring was 
only possible in the up-currents found over such slopes, its 
devotees were forced to limit their activities to the areas 
containing such slopes, which thus offered the twofold 
advantage of serving as training grounds for novices and 
high schools for the further education of advanced pupils. 
In Germany, moreover, great importance was attached to 
both the practice and the scientific, theoretical study of 
true soaring flight ; there was therefore no question of 
endeavouring to popularize courses for instruction in the 
flat country where only gliding flight was possible.
To America belongs the credit of having been the first 
country to give practical demonstrations of new methods on 
a large scale. When the Treaty of Versailles imposed its 
heavy restrictions upon Germany's power-driven machines, 
any German who wanted to learn to fly was compelled to 
put up with the hardships involved in a course of instruc­ 
tion in gliding flight, but when this sport was introduced to 
the inhabitants of the New World it had to make its way 
against the competition of the more convenient, though 
more expensive, engined aeroplanes. 
But the practical, 
businesslike Americans were quicker than any other 
nation to realize the importance of gliding flight as a means 
of paving the way for a course of instruction in the art of 
flying power-driven machines. " We must create millions 
of young people who are permeated with the idea of flight/' 
was the American motto. " Wings for the youth of 
America ! " was the slogan of the friends of soaring flight.

--- PAGE 303 ---
232 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
Unfortunately piloting power-driven aircraft is still con­ 
sidered a dangerous occupation ; consequently aeroplane 
factories are short of the customers they need, while aerial 
traffic lines cry out for more passengers. But the boy 
with a " push-bike " is certain to yearn for a motor-cycle, 
and finally he will invest in a car if his means permit him 
to do so ; in similar fashion, therefore, the youth who learns 
to soar will one day want to try a light, power-driven 
aeroplane, from which he will eventually graduate to all 
other aircraft. This undoubted fact has induced the 
Americans to champion the view : " Neither art nor science 
are the motives of our interest in soaring flight, which we 
regard primarily as a means of attracting and educating 
pilots for the power-driven aeroplanes/'
Opinions may differ as to the correctness of this point of 
view, but two advantages have accrued from it. The 
capital of the aeroplane industries has been brought into 
soaring flying, while a new method of starting the soaring 
planes has been found. This is the " towed start " by 
means of a motor-car.
The Americans wanted to use their gliders and sail­ 
planes at week-ends and in the weekday leisure hours in 
the same way as they used their power-driven aeroplanes ; 
they, therefore, promptly tackled the problem of freeing the 
new sport from its dependence on suitable slopes, the direc­ 
tion of the wind, the large starting crews and the time-factor. 
They began by using their motor-cars to bring the gliders 
back to the starting-place after a flight ; then the idea 
occurred to someone that by employing a motor-car to tow 
the glider the pilot would be able to dispense with the 
starting crew. At first the ordinary rubber shock-cable 
was attached to the motor-car, but later it was replaced by 
a steel hawser, which caused the machine to rise into the air 
behind the car like a kite.
Unfortunately a misunderstanding caused the flying 
enthusiasts in Germany to regard the American towed start 
as something in the nature of a " stunt " even when it was 
past the experimental stage and had developed a school of 
its own. The school methods applied by Professor Franklin 
met with the greatest success, and certainly set a good

--- PAGE 304 ---
AUTO AND AEROPLANE TOWING 
233
example to follow. The Americans started courses of 
instruction at their ordinary aerodromes and endeavoured 
to popularize the movement among the dwellers in the plains 
without stopping to consider whether they could offer their 
pupils any opportunities for genuine soaring.
Development on similar lines took place in England, 
where Lowe-Wylde was the pioneer who swiftly recognized 
the importance of the towed start as the method for the 
schools of the future and set about developing new types and 
methods.
Meanwhile cloud flying was in its heyday in Germany. 
Thunderstorm flights were frequently carried out, while the 
thermal soaring by which the pilot utilizes currents of warm 
air, opened up further fields of activity for motorless flight. 
From the slopes of the mountains the pilots thus found 
their way across the plains, taking no heed of the nature 
of the landscape below them, and experience now seems to 
show that cloud and thermal soaring are more easily carried 
out over flat country because a better view of the conditions 
can be obtained by the pilot and there are less disturbances 
by other currents.
Eventually a certain need for scientific knowledge induced 
the Rhon-Rossitten Ges. to experiment with the towed 
start by means of aeroplanes. Espenlaub was the first to 
develop the method in Germany, but later Raab, the "stunt" 
pilot, took it up and used it for exhibition purposes at 
aviation meetings. In America many pilots began to exploit 
the new method as a means of carrying out sporting feats, 
the greatest achievement in this direction being the trans­ 
continental towed flight which Hawks accomplished on a 
glider specially constructed for the purpose by Professor 
Franklin.
It was found possible to employ soaring machines 
equipped with instruments recording temperature, moisture, 
and pressure, to carry out meteorological flights. The 
machine was simply towed by an aeroplane to an area where 
interesting currents were to be found such as those in 
clouds or in the thermal currents of a pronounced nature 
which are located over towns. This method made it 
easier to choose and investigate certain weather and cloud

--- PAGE 305 ---
234 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
conditions, and much was done to simplify the art of cloud 
flying.
Thus we see that systematic schooling-methods grew up 
in England and America for the towed start by means of the 
motor-car, while Germany used the aeroplane for the same 
purpose. In the homeland of soaring flight there were at 
first only two experts who tried to improve on the methods 
in use for the towed start by means of the motor-car. One 
of these was Wolf Hirth, who had returned home after a 
series of flights in America, where he had studied the 
method, while the other was the author of this book who 
had also studied the technique of the American towed start 
thoroughly and learnt to recognize its value for Germany 
after he had tested it practically in England.
THE AUTO TOWED START
Numerous experiments were made to test the value 
of the motor-car for starting purposes, and it was not 
long before a method was discovered which proved 
capable of universal application. This method is worthy of 
a detailed description.
For an auto towed start three primary factors are essential 
—the motor-car, the cable, and the glider. There are, of 
course, some other few necessary accessories.
The motor-car must naturally be sufficiently powerful. 
If an ordinary touring car is to be used continually for this 
work, it should be one of the 2| to 3-litre class and one 
whose upkeep is not too expensive. If a racing car is 
available, the capacity of its cylinders may be even smaller. 
On the other hand, a highly-powered car is often a source 
of danger, as it is liable to place too great a strain on the 
glider. 
As a general rule the car should be such that, 
from a standing start, it may be speeded up steadily to 
from thirty to forty miles an hour. If a glider equipped 
with wheels is used, the car-driver can change gear, but 
experience has shown that it is better, if possible, to avoid 
any sudden variations of speed. The primary need is to 
avoid any strain that might break the cable or its connection

--- PAGE 306 ---
62. 
ESPENLAUB'S GLIDER THAT WAS TOWED BY A MOTOR-PLANE. 1927
Facing page 2

--- PAGE 307 ---
THE AUTO TOWKI) START
1. The start.
"2. Soaring- plane rises.
3. Castimj off.
c>
4. Landing.
5. Car tows the plane baek to 
starting plaee.
6. Winding in the cable prior to 
fresh start.
Facing page 235

--- PAGE 308 ---
AUTO AND AEROPLANE TOWING 
235
to the glider ; the clutch must therefore be let in gently and 
the motor-car accelerated evenly without jerking.
The springs of the car must be of a type which will permit 
it to be driven at from thirty to forty miles an hour over the 
uneven ground as found on some aerodromes. The less 
the car bumps under these conditions, the better the 
results will be. Weight is also a matter of importance ; if 
the car is too heavy, it takes too long to accelerate, and 
consequently the glider will not rise easily. On the other 
hand a very light car is liable to bump too much. On the 
whole a medium-weight car with a good ground clearance 
is the right type.
It is wise to turn a deaf ear to tales of the good behaviour 
of heavy cars on rough ground. A heavy car may seem to 
take the inequalities of the ground well, but in reality it can 
only do so at the expense of its springs, axle and differential. 
Such cars are liable to break down suddenly when employed 
on this kind of work, in which case the result is usually a 
heavy bill for repairs.
An open car is naturally preferable to a closed one on 
account of the better view of the operations which it affords ; 
likewise it facilitates the attachment of the cable. The 
simplest place to fasten the latter would be either the rear 
bumper-bar or the luggage carrier, but in this case the 
simplest is not always the best. Any car traversing the 
surface of an aerodrome at a high speed is bound to meet 
with some bad bumps ; should one of these occur at the 
moment when the glider is flying vertically above the car, 
the shock will be communicated to it through the taut cable. 
The result will be an excessive strain on the machine which 
may easily lead to the breakage of a wing, so it is therefore 
a far better plan to attach the cable to the centre of gyration 
of the car, which is about the back of the driver's seat ; on 
the other hand, it does not matter whether the cable is fixed 
on the right or the left of the driver.
A closed car can be used if the attachment is made at one 
side of the car at a spot equidistant from the front and back 
axles, but the instructor will find it very difficult to keep an 
eye on the machine or the pupil in it. If the use of a closed 
car is inevitable, it is best to have the observation done by

--- PAGE 309 ---
236 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
a man standing on the step or sitting on the back seat and 
looking out through the window at the back. As both 
these methods are inconvenient, a good plan is to attach a 
trailer to the car. In this the observer sits on a bicycle 
saddle, with his back to the driver ; the quick-release to 
which the cable is fastened is then fixed to the trailer. This 
arrangement also permits the observer to carry a drum in 
his trailer which he can brake if necessary as the cable runs 
out, and upon which he can wind up the cable after use. A 
similar drum arrangement can also be used with an open 
car, where it must be placed at the centre of gyration.
For reasons of safety the car must have a quick-release 
as well as the glider ; the great disadvantage of the drum 
being that it prevents immediate release in cases of emer­ 
gency. This defect, however, can be remedied by fastening 
the end of the cable on the drum by means of a peg, from 
which it will be released the moment its full length runs 
out ; this eliminates all possibility of trouble if the quick- 
release on the glider itself fails to loose its end of the cable.
As even such a release must take a certain amount of time 
to operate and there is always the possibility of the winch 
jamming or the cable becoming tangled, it is advisable to 
have some means of cutting the cable in case of emergency. 
The best device is an ordinary pair of shears or wire-cutters, 
one handle of which is affixed to the winch in a way that 
allows the outgoing cable a free passage between the open 
blades, while the observer has only to press the other one 
if he wants to sever the connection.
On grounds of safety some experts recommend the use of 
a hempen rope for machines carrying pupils, because in 
case of emergency it breaks more easily than a steel cable. 
But the latter stands wear and tear better than the former, 
while provided its dimensions are not too great, or an 
artificial flaw is created, it will break as easily as a rope in 
case of need. I therefore prefer the steel cable, as it is 
possible to use the same form of cable for both novices and 
advanced pupils. A third alternative is steel wire, which 
finds favour on account of its cheapness, but it is awkward 
material to handle and does not stand strains too well. 
After all, the towing cable need not be made of the expensive

--- PAGE 310 ---
AUTO AND AEROPLANE TOWING 
237
material which is used for the glider's control cables ; the 
latter, of course, have to stand the wear and tear of constant 
friction when operating on their pulleys, so that they must 
necessarily be made of the finest and most flexible material. 
The towing cable, however, is not subjected to such strains.
We can therefore be satisfied with a cable composed of 
fewer but stronger strands, which will be fairly cheap to 
purchase. This cable should be impregnated or coated 
with a strong varnish in order to prevent moisture or grains 
of sand collecting between the strands, but no preparation 
containing any kind of acid must be used for this purpose.
The life of a towing rope can be considerably lengthened 
if a spring connection is used with it. Various devices were 
tried for this purpose, but eventually the simplest of them 
found most favour.
This is a double piece of ordinary rubber shock cord, 
three to six feet long. This is affixed to one end (or, better 
still, to both ends) of the towing-cable, but in either case a 
check cable must span the rubber cord so that if this latter 
breaks the glider will not suddenly be freed. If only one 
of these " springs " is used, it must naturally be located at 
the motor-car end of the cable, because the other end trails 
on the ground when the pilot has released it, with conse­ 
quent wear and tear on the rubber itself as well as on the 
splicing.
It goes without saying that a towing-rope rendered 
elastic in this fashion will do much to save the machine 
from wear and tear as well as prevent accidents in the 
case of a sudden strain. There is, of course, no technical 
reason why an all-rubber towing-cable should not be used, 
but as the same effect of resilience can be induced by the 
method described above, the cost of a rubber cable and its 
short life are decisive factors against its use. Moreover, a 
rubber cable risks the accumulation of uncontrollable 
energies and may cause undesirable oscillations.
Cables can easily be wound up and stowed away when not 
in use ; dividing, by coloured tags, into sections of from 
thirty to sixty feet in length is also useful, so that the 
observer can easily check the length of line he is paying out.
Any type of glider can be used for these towed starts,

--- PAGE 311 ---
238 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
provided that its construction is strong enough to stand 
the strain and its speed approximates to the normal speed 
of the motor-car towing it. The heavier type of machine 
naturally gathers speed more slowly and requires a longer 
run before it can be released. 
Gliders of the type known 
as the light-wind sailplanes can be towed by smaller cars, 
but care must be taken not to put too much strain on their 
light frames. The " Zogling " was never designed for such 
purposes, but machines such as the " Priifling " and the 
"Falke," which are built with normal fuselages, have been 
found quite adaptable to it. The best type is, however, 
the " Utility Glider/' specially designed by the brothers 
Franklin for towed starts. This fulfils one of the most 
important demands made on the types used for towed starts 
in that it is highly sensitive and responds readily to all its 
controls.
Such machines must also be designed so that they readily 
assume their proper flying angle and can quickly rise from 
the ground. Most soaring gliders would be found wanting 
in this respect.
The towed machine must likewise " taxi " well. Judging 
by the experience of instructors, the best type of machine 
for such purposes runs on a central wheel and answers 
readily to all controls when moving along the ground at a 
pace less than its flying speed. The wheel or wheels must 
not be set too far below the fuselage, otherwise the 
machine is likely to capsize, but perhaps a machine provided 
with a wheel running in a divided skid is the best solution 
of this problem. It is also advisable to have a wheel brake 
that will prevent the machine running too far and enable it 
to be landed either with or against the slope in hilly country, 
in the latter case it is necessary to guard against the glider 
running backwards after it has landed, and for this a wheel 
brake is most useful.
A machine with an enclosed cockpit gives the pupil a 
greater sense of security and enables him to accustom him­ 
self from the beginning to the types which he will afterwards 
be expected to fly. A machine employed for instructional 
purposes should also be built more solidly than one intended 
for soaring only ; it thus gains in strength, while the extra

--- PAGE 312 ---
AUTO AND AEROPLANE TOWING 
239
weight is easily counterbalanced by the power of the motor­ 
car. The pilot's seat should be located in a position which 
enables him to have a vertical view of what is happening 
directly below him, so that he can keep an eye on the car 
and the cable at the moment when the machine rises to its 
maximum captive height.
Another important factor is the fitting of the quick-release 
on the glider itself. Many mistakes have been made in this 
respect. If large altitudes are to be reached the release 
must be placed in a position that permits the line of the 
cable to pass through the centre of gravity of the glider. 
This is the only way to save the machine from those strains 
which are bound to occur when the cable is attached to the 
machine's nose. The pull on the machine then produces 
a continual forward dip, which the pilot constantly en­ 
deavours to correct by pulling his stick backwards. 
It is technically difficult to install the quick-release 
actually on the centre of gravity, although that would 
be best. If the glider is to attain its maximum height after 
the pilot has cast off the cable (as, for instance, in competi­ 
tions), the best position can only be found by drawing 
through the centre of gravity in the direction of the nose a 
line of ten degrees out of the vertical. The point where 
this line intersects the floor of the cockpit or the skid is the 
correct position for the hook.
This is, however, not a practical position for the quick- 
releases of gliders used for instructional purposes. The 
further back the quick-release is placed, the greater will be 
the machine's inclination when it is taxying. For school 
purposes it is therefore advisable to put the quick-release in 
a position where it will allow the line of the cable an inclina­ 
tion of about thirty degrees to the vertical.
When a machine receives its start from the towing power 
of a car or an aeroplane, it is a matter of vital necessity that 
the mechanism shall be in good working order, so that the 
contact may be broken at any moment from either end if 
occasion arises. It is obvious that the failure of the release 
would have disastrous effects, but in order to allay any fears 
the timid may have I herewith take this opportunity to 
assure my readers that the cable, which is usually not over

--- PAGE 313 ---
240 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
strong can generally be broken in an emergency by an extra 
heavy pull from the glider.
On the other hand, I have also known a case where the 
mechanism failed to operate when the pilot put his glider 
into a turn. The cable prevented him from completing his 
turn, and the consequence was a sideslip. There are many 
kinds of quick-releases which behave splendidly as long as 
the machine moves forward in a straight line, but, in my 
opinion, the least that can be expected of such mechanisms 
is that they should permit the pilot to cast off the cable from 
any position into which he may put his machine. It some­ 
times occurs that the glider forges ahead of the car, so that 
the cable leads backwards from it and in front of the towing- 
car. This angle is the very reverse of the correct one, and 
in such cases the pilot should be able to cast off as quickly 
and easily as possible.
This desirable consummation has been achieved by two 
different devices. In one of them the catch of the quick- 
release is so constructed that it can be pulled open in any 
direction ; in the other the ring at the end of the cable is 
pressed against a spring with a strong outward action when 
it is put into the quick-release ; when the latter is opened 
the ring is then bound to be forced out.
The quick-release should be easy to operate from the 
pilot's seat. Good results have been achieved by means of 
a small handle affixed to the control column in a fashion 
similar to that employed for the brakes of motor-cycles. 
The pilot can then operate the mechanism without undue 
fumbling. The connection between this handle and the 
quick-release itself is best effected by a Bowden wire.
Mention must be made of another small accessory. The 
normal practice in the ordinary towing schools is to allow 
the cable to trail along the ground after the pilot has cast 
it off; the car then proceeds to the position where the glider 
is expected to land, and tows it back to the starting point. 
The driver's next problem is to pull the cable round until it 
forms a line against the direction of the wind ; this is 
effected by means of a steel tube with a pointed end, on 
which is mounted a revolving pulley. The point of this 
instrument is forced into the ground, and the cable is

--- PAGE 314 ---
AUTO AND AEROPLANE TOWING 
241
allowed to run round the pulley. The car drives round 
until it has drawn the rope into a faultless straight line ; 
then, as soon as the free end of the cable has been hooked 
on to the machine, everything is ready for a fresh start.
Finally I would emphasize the advantages of telephonic 
communication between the pilot of the glider and the 
driver of the towing-car. This is a safety device which 
eliminates many accidents.
The pilot can warn the driver of the car to go faster or 
slower ; he can, in fact, regulate the pace of the car according 
to the velocity of the wind he finds aloft. The telephone 
line can be inserted in the cable and made to fit into a plug 
in the soaring-plane. The great advantage of this is that 
both the pilot and the driver are warned by the severance 
of telephonic communication that the cable has been cast 
off. A telephone also enables an instructor to give direc­ 
tions to his pupil while the latter's machine is rising.
SOME RULES FOR INSTRUCTION IN TOWED FLIGHT
In towed starts as in other branches of soaring flight the 
instructor should take the precaution of letting his pupil 
advance gradually from the easy to the hard tasks.
The first exercise for the pupil is to learn to manage his 
machine during its preliminary taxying behind the car. 
At this initial stage the instructor should allow only a short 
length of cable between the car and the glider so that he 
(from his position in the car) can keep a closer eye on his 
pupil. The short length will also prevent any danger of 
the cable catching on the ground when the glider swings out 
sideways. At first the car should only be driven at a speed 
less than the glider's minimum flying speed ; and the pupil 
should be ready to operate the quick-release immediately. 
If the plane has been properly built, it will even at this speed 
answer to all the controls.
The pupil must first learn how to manage his rudder and 
endeavour to keep his glider directly behind the car. He 
then masters the functions of the ailerons, after which he 
may practise lifting the tail gently into flying position.

--- PAGE 315 ---
242 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
The first taxying exercises ought to take place on windless 
days in order to avoid any danger of a sudden gust lifting 
the glider from the ground and to permit the instructor to 
drive across the aerodrome as he will, thus eliminating 
much waste of time.
It is advisable to put the pupil through a course of at least 
ten taxying exercises, so as to make quite sure that he learns 
how to use the controls ; the instructor may then let him 
undertake ten short flights at low altitudes. In these the 
pupil is told to lift up the tail, after the usual run along the 
ground, and then take off gently. As soon as he finds that 
he is in the air, he must gently land again. This process of 
alternate taxying, rising and landing must be repeated 
several times in order to instil into the pupil a sense of the 
motions of taking off, moving through the air and coming 
down.
When the pupil is proficient in these exercises, his next 
task is to fly at a height of about three to six feet while 
following the car right across the flying-ground. The 
length of the cable has meanwhile been gradually increased, 
and for these captive flights it should be about three 
hundred feet long.
The novice must be under strict discipline. The great 
advantage of the towed start is that it enables the instructor 
to exercise complete control over his pupil at any given 
moir ent. If, for instance, a false sense of ambition inspires 
the latter to climb higher than his state of proficiency 
warrants, the instructor can sever the connection at his end 
as soon as he sees that the stick is being pulled back 
too much, whereupon the glider is bound to come down 
before it can reach a dangerous height. 
Such disciplinary 
measures will teach the pupil to obey all orders.
The pupil's next lesson deals with the operation of the 
quick-release. He receives instructions to rise to a height 
of fifteen feet or so, note whether his machine is in a correct 
flying position and then cast off and come down in a glide. 
During the whole course of instruction it is important to 
aim at preventing the pupil stalling while climbing, his 
aim should be to keep it in a position which will permit him 
to commence his glide the moment he has cast off. This

--- PAGE 316 ---
AUTO AND AEROPLANE TOWING 
243
exercise will have to be repeated from six to ten times 
before the pupil can perform it with complete safety.
When he is perfect in it, there is no reason why he should 
not be allowed to rise somewhat higher (to about fifty feet, 
let us say) and learn how to climb a little faster, although 
the instructor must insist upon him pushing the stick 
forward and putting the machine into a glide as soon as he 
has released the cable. After five such flights the pupil 
may be allowed to rise to heights varying between one 
hundred and fifty and two hundred feet.
Then come the turns. The pupil is told to put the 
machine into a gentle turn, paying particular heed to the 
action of his rudder and ailerons. 
Then come the steeper 
turns, but the instructor must impress upon his pupil the 
dangers of attempting to turn when only a short distance 
above the ground or making a turn before he has flown 
some distance on the straight. Then come five further 
flights on a three hundred and sixty feet length of cable, 
during which the pupil should be able to practise S turns 
when he has cast off.
The next stage admits of a six-hundred feet length of 
cable, which gives the pupil his first taste of the heights. 
Here the instructor must take care that his charge does not 
climb too fast and also make sure that he casts off at the 
right moment. The more difficult exercises must, of 
course, be practised only in calm weather, but it is a good 
plan to let the pupil repeat the easier ones on windy days. 
When, for instance, the glider has reached a height of about 
one hundred and fifty feet, the pupil can try taxying in a 
wind, and, if he is proficient in S turns on a windless day, 
he can be allowed to learn the art of straight flying in strong 
winds or gusts.
Six hundred feet of cable should easily suffice for flights 
of one to two minutes' duration, but only after a thorough 
course of training should the pupil be permitted to practise 
turns of three hundred and sixty degrees before landing. 
A more advanced pupil can then learn to handle the machine 
when the car tows it in various directions and practise turns 
around a mark on the ground. Finally a landing Tee is 
laid out, and the pupil learns to come down on it.

--- PAGE 317 ---
244 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
Above all, the instructor must see to it that his pupil 
ascends calmly and without fluster, keeping a careful eye on 
the motor-car's movements all the time he is rising. The 
pupil must be cautioned against turning back unless he is 
flying at a sufficient height. " Keep your eye on the cable " 
is a golden rule, and it is a good plan too to mark its length 
with flags placed at various intervals.
In this, as in other forms of flight, a slow, careful and 
graded course of instruction is a surer way to true success 
than a quick, hustling method can ever be.
WINDLASS STARTS
We now pass on to a variation of the towed start by 
means of a stationary windlass, which is placed at one end 
of a small aerodrome or in the middle of a large one. The 
cable is then attached to a drum which must be of dimen­ 
sions that will permit the winding process to take place at a 
speed equivalent to the machine's normal flying speed. By 
these means it is possible to achieve the same results as 
with an auto towed start.
If only one car is available, it is possible to lock three 
of its wheels and jack up the fourth. The cable then 
operates on a drum made fast to the hub, but it must not 
be forgotten that as the car's differential is now inoperative, 
the one wheel will revolve at twice the pace of two wheels 
running on the ground. Failure to observe this precaution 
once resulted in a fatal accident.
Another variation is the motor-windlass, which can be 
made out of an old car by affixing a drum to the engine or 
the Garden shaft. In this case it is advisable to place the 
windlass close to the starting-place, so that the instructor is 
in a good position to watch his pupil's actions ; the cable 
is then carried across to the other end of the ground, where 
it passes round a stationary pulley. A vital necessity for 
this kind of start is a cutting implement, through the open 
blades of which the cable must pass, so that the instructor 
can sever the connection at any given moment.
The pupil must not forget that this form of start limits

--- PAGE 318 ---
AUTO AND AEROPLANE TOWING 
245
the height to which he can rise, for as soon as his machine 
comes over the windlass it will be pulled vertically down­ 
wards. He is therefore compelled to cast off sooner than 
in an auto towed start.
Very much greater lengths of cable are required. Three 
thousand feet is quite a normal length for the cables em­ 
ployed in this start. I recommend the instructor to affix a 
bright-coloured flag to the cable at a suitable spot ; as soon 
as the pupil sees this flag appear on the pulley or the 
windlass, he will then know that the right moment has 
come for him to cast off. It is also advisable to have another 
man on the ground with a flag which he can wave as a 
signal to the pilot to free himself from the cable.
The great advantage of this method over the others is 
the fact that it saves much wear and tear on the car, especi­ 
ally if the latter has to traverse rough, uneven ground in the 
course of the start. Although most differentials are not 
built to stand long strains, they are not likely to suffer 
much damage as the time required for the take-off only is 
from one to two minutes, after which the engine and 
differential have a long rest. Experience has shown that 
no evil consequences need be expected for the car. Another 
advantage is the elimination of damage to the aerodrome 
which is bound to suffer if constantly traversed by heavy 
vehicles.
A further advantage of the windlass is the even pace at 
which it tows the machine. The engine is spared the extra 
burden of propelling the car's weight ; consequently the 
machine begins to rise after a very short run. 
The start 
can therefore be given with an engine of far less power than 
that needed for an auto towed start. Moreover, this method 
can be used on rough ground which a car would be unable 
to traverse.
The size of the field does not matter greatly for so much 
space is not lost as when using a car with a long cable. On 
large aerodromes it is quite easy to sink a permanent wind­ 
lass somewhere in the middle of the ground, in which case 
the cable is directed upwards by means of a swivelling 
guiding-pulley.
Against these several advantages we must take into

--- PAGE 319 ---
246 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
consideration the drawback that a special car is generally 
needed to bring the glider back to its starting-place after it 
has landed. The use of a second drum and cable will obviate 
this, but much valuable time is generally wasted in getting 
the cable into position. Circumstances will have to dictate 
whether this method or any other is to be used to bring the 
glider back, but it should not be too hard to weigh up the 
pros and cons and reach a practical solution of the difficulty.
AEROPLANE TOWING
THE AEROPLANE
In practice, aeroplane-towing is feasible for any sailplane 
possessing effective controls and built strong enough to 
stand the strain, provided that the aeroplane can be flown 
at a speed not much greater than the normal speed of the 
machine it is towing.
To each make of gliding or soaring plane must therefore 
be assigned a particular type of towing-aeroplane, while for 
reasons of safety, care must be taken to ensure that the 
weight of the tower does not too greatly exceed that of the 
towed. A towed machine makes its best flights when the 
weights of both are approximately equal, but it must be 
remembered that in gusty air the power-driven machine's 
speed will be greatly reduced by an over-severe pull on the 
cable. Its pilot can do nothing to remedy this state of affairs. 
Another indispensable safety condition requires that the 
power-driven machine shall answer readily to its controls, 
even when near the stalling point ; if the machine has any 
tendency to drop its nose or a wing, there is bound to be an 
accident. But the average light aeroplane is very reliable, 
as is also the heavier old-fashioned school machine with low 
wing loading.
The cable must be affixed to the towing machine in a 
way that will prevent it from becoming entangled with the 
controls or any important parts of either machine, whatever

--- PAGE 320 ---
64. 
NORMAL AUTO TOWEU START
Facing page 2

--- PAGE 321 ---
[Upper] AUTO TOWED START IN DEAD CALM.
[Lower] AUTO TOWED START IN GALE. 
THE SOARING PLANK is EXDAXGERED BY EXCESSIVE STRAIN, 
THE STRONGER THE WIND, THE SLOWER MUST HE THE CAR'S STEED
Facing page 1^47

--- PAGE 322 ---
AUTO AND AEROPLANE TOWING 
247
may be their positions. The ideal arrangement is for the 
cable to be carried past the tail surfaces in a tube so placed 
that the prolongation of the cable's line in normal flight runs 
through the centre of gravity of the power-driven aeroplane. 
The quick-release can also be placed behind the tail surfaces, 
but here again the line of the cable must pass through the 
centre of gravity. Moreover, great care must be taken to 
prevent the cable fouling the tail surfaces when cast off.
If these two requirements are to be met fully, it would 
seem necessary for the power-driven machine to be equipped 
with a more or less complicated towing apparatus. But 
here theory and practice are at variance, for experience has 
shown that fairly simple devices will give complete satisfac­ 
tion. For beginners a fool-proof apparatus is undoubtedly 
an essential, but simpler mechanisms will suffice if the 
pilots of the power-driven machine and the soaring plane 
know their business and take care to keep one behind the 
other in a fairly straight line. In America it is often the 
practice to place the quick-release somewhere on the 
power-driven aeroplane's skid. This is a most precarious 
position, as the cable is liable to foul the tail surfaces if the 
glider rises high above its tower. The danger can, how­ 
ever, be minimized by prolonging the skid sufficiently to 
ensure free passage for the cable, no matter what position 
the soaring plane may assume. If it is impossible to ensure 
this clearance by such means, the difficulty can be circum­ 
vented by affixing a short length of steel tubing, secured by 
two clips, which will project from under the rudder. The 
hook is then attached to this projection.
Aeroplanes destined to be used permanently for towing 
should carry drums on which the cable can be wound. 
The advantage of this is that the length of the cable between 
the two machines can be varied for starting to suit the size 
of the aerodrome, while the cable can also be paid out during 
the flight. The shorter the cable, the more difficult will be 
the work while the two machines are connected in the air, 
but on the other hand it is impossible to use a long cable for 
a start on a small aerodrome.
Safety measures and devices must not be neglected. As 
a fairly short length of cable is generally the rule for

--- PAGE 323 ---
248 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
aeroplane towed flights, the drum carried in the aeroplane 
should be provided with a peg off which the cable will slip 
as soon as it has run out to its full length. As in the case of 
towed starts by motor-car, the cable should be rendered 
resilient by attaching a piece of rubber shock-cord at one 
or both ends, while it is always advisable to affix flags to the 
cable in order to render its position visible during a flight. 
Too much stress cannot be laid on the advantage of tele­ 
phonic communication between the two pilots.
(2) 
THE TOWED GLIDER
If gusts should lift the glider high above the aeroplane 
towing it, the former is likely to find itself carrying some 
portion of the latter's weight. This places too great a 
strain on the glider and may easily lead to a broken wing. 
Another danger factor is an excessive towing speed.
Hence it is our endeavour to reach a compromise between 
safety measures and flying efficiency. As, in my opinion, 
the towed flight is more suitable for instructional purposes 
than for cross-country flights, it seems to me unwise to 
deviate greatly from the strength and weight found neces­ 
sary for normal sailplanes, which should, therefore, be 
towed only by aeroplanes of slow speed and light engine- 
power. For special " stunts " or for long overland flights 
gliders with special modifications must be used, but it must 
be remembered that all such are generally made at the 
expense of performance in free gliding flight. The de­ 
mands, with regard to the position for the quick-release, the 
view for the pilot and controllability, are more or less 
similar to those desirable for towed starts by cars. The 
cable should be about four hundred and fifty to six hundred 
feet long and from one-eighth to seven-thirty-seconds of 
an inch in diameter.
The best method of imparting instruction in aeroplane 
towed flight is in conjunction with a course of car towed 
starts. In each case the same principles apply to the 
start.

--- PAGE 324 ---
AUTO AND AEROPLANE TOWING 
249
While the power-driven aircraft is still taxying, the glider 
rises about thirty feet above it, but this height must not be 
increased. When both machines are in the air, the pilot of 
the glider must endeavour to keep more or less the same 
height and distance above and behind his tower ; this is a 
feat which should cause little difficulty to a well-trained 
pupil. Preliminary training should include several short 
flights in which the pupil tries to maintain his height of 
thirty feet above his towing machine and memorizes the 
angle of the cable. As long as he maintains this angle, he 
may be sure that he is flying correctly. He must keep 
height and distance while both machines are rising ; then 
the power-driven machine goes into a wide turn and heads 
for the aerodrome, while the other casts off and lands after 
a glide.
The first flight should be a short one, so that the in­ 
structor may say whether the position with regard to the 
towing-machine were correct. Telephonic communication 
between the two machines makes for a better understanding 
between instructor and pupil because the former can correct 
the latter's errors during the flight itself. It goes without 
saying that the initial flights should only take place on 
windless days or in light, steady, gust-free breezes.
The glider pilot can render the power-driven machine's 
start easier by rising higher as soon as his plane leaves the 
ground and then easing the stick forward ; he thus frees 
the towing machine from his weight and enables it to get 
off the ground more quickly. As the normal flying speed 
of a power-driven aeroplane is greater than that of a glider, 
the increase of pace imparted to the latter machine by the 
impetus of the tow will render its controls more sensitive— 
especially the elevator. The pilot therefore must learn to 
accustom himself to this increase of sensitiveness.
On days of wind and gusts a towed flight becomes a 
difficult matter, and under certain circumstances it may 
prove one of the hardest flying feats to perform. When the 
sky is full of cumulus clouds, ticklish situations often arise 
because one machine gets into an up-current while the other 
is still flying in a downdraught, or vice versa. It is essential 
to impress upon the pupil's mind that whenever he feels the

--- PAGE 325 ---
250 KRONFELD ON GLIDING & SOARING
cable to be subjected to too great a strain, he must cast loose 
before he gets into worse trouble.
The best method of flight is for the power-driven aero­ 
plane to proceed at an even speed while the pilot of the 
towed machine tries to correct any deviations from the 
direct line of flight. If both pilots attempt to make the 
corrections, the result will probably be a series of oscilla­ 
tions, but if upward gusts lift the power-driven aeroplane 
to a height above the glider, the pilot of the former must 
throttle his engine and dive until he comes down to the 
latter's level.
If a conspicuous flag is attached to the middle of the 
cable's length, the towed pilot can judge whether his position 
is correct by noting its slope below him. In gusty weather 
the cable will often be suddenly drawn taut, but by keeping 
his eye on the flag all the time he will be able to ease the 
strain at the critical moment by pushing his machine down 
slightly and thus relieving the tension. He can also avoid 
sudden jerks on the cable by flying slightly to one side of 
his tower, so that he can watch his movements and act 
accordingly. When the strain becomes too great, he must 
allow his machine to oscillate in arcs until he can resume 
his original position slightly to one side of his leader. Thus 
he creates a kind of elasticity which has a damping effect on 
the cable's motions and helps to keep it at an even tension.
The pilot towed by an aeroplane will require some con­ 
siderable practice before he makes his turns correctly. 
Sharp turns are unnecessary, and the best position in any 
turn is on the outside of the aeroplane. If the glider pilot 
gets on the inside of the towing-machine during a turn, the 
cable is bound to slacken ; he then loses height and is 
liable to drop below his leader. But if he keeps on the 
outside of the towing-machine, so that he has to cover the 
greater amount of space by flying in a wider radius, he will 
keep the rope taut and consequently rise. In this way he 
can regulate his height above the towing-machine during a 
tur