FLICKFIBEL — PLASTIC PLANE PATCH PRIMER (3rd issue, 1978)
Ursula Haenle — English translation. GRP/fibreglass repair guide for sailplanes.
OCR from scanned PDF (no text layer). OCR errors present; verify critical values
against the source scan: composite_repair/plastic_plane_patch_primer_flickfibel_1978.pdf
======================================================================

--- Page 1 ---
U
R
SU
LA H
-
N
LE

|


--- Page 2 ---



--- Page 3 ---
Forewoxd of 4rd issue

Crewing experience and enlarging of the plastic planes, also develop-
ment of the ‘basic materials required since long time a new~

forming of the Patch Primer. Or, really radical: is this thing

still necessary?

‘yot only that we know in the meantime other fibers, from what the
slender birds are made ; the manufacturers are pressed by the LBA
to deliver maintenance and repair handbooks for each type of them.
And these are responsible before all other papers because the manu-
facturer carries the responsibility, against you and the DBA.

Only if there is nothing to have from him, because he is no more
present, f.i., jump into his part the LBA, his control organizations,
or an LTB (there are available a lot, also some with good quality).
the necessary to explain a complicate repair method will be replace
also by the lot of FRP = workshops which are arranged. on many places.

the villages in possession of an FRP expert grew more numerous!

pot what we miss in spite of this: a general introduction for-wew-
comers in this territory. For instance; what [I have to observe if

I would like to buy -such a plane? What I can do for to conserve it

for a possible long time ? How I can help myself in case of little
failures? .

The new Patch Primer for this will have its ¢.G. more to this subjects.
But it affords the luxe to transmit without change the introduction

of the first issue from 30 years ago - a lot of this is no more utopic
atoday.

When TI wrote in 1967 the first issue of the booklet, I was nearly
as a prophet in the desert.

Today we are in the position to know, not by speculation but
by experience,to say how is the behaviour of a plane with 410 years
in action. : .

the new Patch Primer also will have the size and the arrangement
which will allow you to insert this general basis into your advises
of the manufacturer. The system of numbering the pages allows to
insert them together with special tips for your plane onthe correct
place. “3

strodehne, spring 1997 \4) af wh
ides
i
\


--- Page 4 ---
Foreword 2nd iss u‘e;

Many owners of a plastic plane which had the wish to learn
more about the inner life of their bird have looked out for

a PPPP without success in the last time.

I thought that another person would write a replacement for it
with much more knowledgment, science and make-up.

However~ this person was not found, sorry. And because under
blind persons the one-eyed is king, so I was sitting down and
writing all the informations from 10 years working and learnin,
on fiberglass sailplanes in this second issue.

. Please would you connect during reading your pleasure to be
able to help yourself in much cases with a moment of thanks

to my husband, Mr. Eugen Haénle, because most of this recogniza
tions were coming from him.

May 78 UE.

Copyright by Ursula Hanle. all rights reserved.


--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents

General

JTMGLOMUCELONs seven cece cere cane nenseneanenses eel (0
A Little schoolabout plastics. cccssensacesenselQ2
Glas fibers, fiberglass... cecesccccnccneeseeeal OD
New fibers. sss cc ccesencnaseescsevesessseesaeee bl d
Sandwich. wsssesee seen eens rer rr
Quality Festa ecressceacsarcacevcvassssveceser sll

Testa

Help for health for PRP gliders....seeeeeeeee+200
Gheck List connected plane..acssaccaveccaseee e204
Check List partSccuscesccecsssessereneenecae es 206
Yearly control...... deren awe nse e ra eseensees eral
Buy a plastic plane. ...ssccerevcecersenen eee es AlQ

Practice

PreLiminariecd secs caasvrecacncccasasssesetene sr OQ
Filling materials, separating fluids.....+...- 301
Tips, Press (VACUUM). seseeeeseesreceresearcess I02
TOOLS. carsecee ene e nn veteneneee cece ete e nance ne D04

Repair tips

FRP- sandwich shells.ecaseecsaenneareerecsr «400
Roving layers ancestor atcererenwenecesanse ne cA Qh
AL1- Fiberglas shells ..sccccecasssnnenesscuce 406
Damaged parts. ance r ener nesene ae anser neers es c4OS
Diverse tesin WOrkS se. cscs cccuaeerene ate acaae «410
Added equipment...asee. sara nnaeowerenasecncneshld

Surface

PUTTY cere esencevenee arrears 16\0)
Finish: polyester golcoat sa nee se eeaee bene a wens 5ol
working methods. pace naes ean eennnaeas eee 02
Finish: DD- laquer | sence ceca ernenene pane e 0 D04

Ganopy
Sealing: Silicone..... pee eeenes pean cawewane ++ 600

Polish ».s..se-- eee neon eeues eee wee eee 601
Segling: plastic canopy FVAMC cece eee ee ee eeees 602

performance tickle

C.Ge POSLTLON cece ene nnae “Vea sawae ates beware >700
Aidleron endplates; Airflow wisecee se naeeeeenes TOL
Sealing, otherS....sseaeeae Cn ewes oneness naee 2702


--- Page 6 ---



--- Page 7 ---
(Foreword to the first issue - 1967! yd 100,

Drrecumn tte,

Pilots, especially glider pilots, have recently lived through a small
revolution. It came from Germany, and it was happy and constructive:

{ An airersfit whdse load-bearing ff

are composed of reinforced plastic.

As it was 50 years ago, when gliding was born, it was young people seeking
the stars, who, without regard for finance or authority, opened a new way
to aircraft construction.

Yes, very clearly: Aircraft construction. Even then no one knew the number
and extent of the cicles which the new construction method would have the
power to influence. Today the method is handicapped, in the sense of

a large~scale industry, by the large amount of hand labor — but so were
other branches of industry in their beginnings. It may be that in 50 years
one will laughingly consider putting today's equipment of a fiberglass
workshop in the Deutches Museum; it may be -that one then will have no. more
the sticky fingers and the collar of glass dust - the beginning was here,
today, with us.

The reinforced plastic aircraft has it roots in ‘demande’ which are quite
special for the sailplane pilot: Higher strength and stiffnesa with lower
weight - one seeks the ultimate of materials — and higher aeroflynamic
performance.

The strength/weight ratio of fiberglass used in aircraft today is higher
than that of good steel. The weights of pilots are more or less fixed,

but cockpits can be fitted with lighter wings than with more conventional
construction. Or, as the advantage is usually taken, the. aireraty can have
higher strength for camparable waight. we '

The conventional conatruction methods normally begin with partially
fabricated material of limited deformability and are accordingly a compro
mise between the form demanded by aerodynamics and its realization by meaua
of a material which has essentially the form of sheets.

Tie reinforced plastic aircraft daes not. embodysuch a compromise. fo be
sure, some sheet-like material is used, but ita fabrication is suited! to
itself from the beginning; it surmounts any Limitations of surface — it
can in practise take on almoat any shape in the greatest detail, formed
with so-called "lost" molds, or even without them. The builder is com-
pletely free to follow the laws of the streaming air.

Mie unbounded formability, and the variability
same time its chief problems, because they re-
h in craftsmanship and design.

These two distinc
of the material
quire an enti


--- Page 8 ---
104

There is still a big item which both the builder and the pilot care about:
The damping effect.

Qne weans by this the capability of a material to absorb an impulse at
its working conditions even though it is not permanently deformed. This
damping effect for load-bearing fiberglass elements in an aircraft is
very high, about 20 times as high as steel, if one takes into account
the higher density of steel.

It follows that a fiberglass fuselage can endure much more thao one

of wood or metal before ita contents are effected. This already applies
to so-called fiberglass— sandwich shells; it applies even more strongly
to solid fiberglass shells. And ultimately one is led to springs of
fiberglass; we already find such springs under helicoptera and aircraft,
and also in the landig gear of the, Libelle (E.g., the tail skid).

A further interesting point for the high- performance pilot is the

quality and permanence of the wing surfaces. A fiberglass reinforced
plastic object, once it is hardened, is, as we shall later clarify,

fixed indefinitely to its original form. It changes no more, even if
soaked in water. It does not chip, spall, or swell, Remedies, such as
coatings, specially total paint~ removings, should be spared on fiberglass
aircraft - no well-equipped bird needs this either. One who cannot live
without polishing something can use ordinary cloth and automobile polish,

Plexiglass polish, ete.

No wonder then, that the love of fiberglass aircraft spreads like an
epidemic. High performance pilots, and those who aspire to be such,
cleave ever more to the swift, slender white birds. But a disquieting
thought lurks in the background: ‘

"Really now, what if the thing gets damaged, or goes kaputt? What then?"

The repair possibilities are basically about the same as for wood. How-
ever, the facts that almost any village holds a cabinetmaker, while must
look a long way for a fiberglass expert, makes the‘ outlook ‘somewhat
delicate... But as fiberglass aircraft become more widespread, fiberglas
glass specialists will - must! ~ appear in flying clubs and workshops.

Small holes in the skin, or a nick in an edge —‘“these'‘oan be fixed from
the directions in the repair kits. And for perchance a damaged spar,

- as with a wooden ship — one would use good sense, and take it only

to someone with knowledge and experience. One shovld not overlook the
fact that this misfortune is rarer with fiberglass, on account of its
gréater durability. :

If any doubts arise during a repair, please ask your constructor, insteed
of taking the risk upon yourself. In order to be complete, this manual
inust at least contain a fairly complete drawing. And in spite of this
there would be the possibilits of added questions. Otherwise there will
be something which you can't repair, either because special tools are
necessary for it, or it would not be advantageous to do the repair work
yourself.

Por special questions, as when one perhaps needs to rémove the ailerons

or where is the best place to put the oxygen equipment, it is again ,
advantageous to have the answers in the standard format, so that you

can make easy work to add this into the booklet. Then you will have repair
instructions for your ship with the minimum trouble and in a smooth
continuous fashion, : ,

fhe system of page numbering permits you to arrange things in the right
Place and provides spare also for special notices and sketches: from
your own practice in workshop. : —


--- Page 9 ---
AGL

A LDIPTTLE SCHOOL ABOUT PLAS ? Ics.

Plastics in aircraft are not new!

The most of the, modern glues for wood or metal are plastic-— based. Plastics
In spite .of this, you find in the operating: manual for your aircraft .

a table which’you have never seen for other birds. This’ does not imply

that other aircraft do nat follow the same lawa. The question is only

whether suck a peculiary ought to be emphasized here.

Alghough ° ‘one knows, for example, ‘that some glues, upon being beated ta
50°C, suffer a loss of strength wich is not recovered on subsequent
cooling, there are no exact studies of the subject. And although it ig
generaily known that all wooods "work", i.e., parts respond to changes in
climate and thereby swell and shrink (metal parts, tpo!), the normal
instruction manual contents itself with the brief remark: "Guard against
excessive hot! sunlight". . Lod

The fiberglasq plane also could use the same term. But rather com—
plate studies thave been made on fiberglass materials ‘and objects made
from them. Accordingly, one can give quite accurate limits-for safety.
Thus one knows, for example, from dtudies made on complete fabricated
articles, how:a wing will behave after 9000 hours under ijpad dike in.
flight, ora fuselage in winch lauych at 54°C (1299F), _

The fiberglass sailplane, when first offered to. the public, met with
other suppositiona. In the geod old days when wooden aircraft made their
appearance, ote didn't know very much about flying and its easgciated |
stresses. One:rattled the wings, and if noting’ fel ah ¥
start. The fiberglass sailplane made its debut “utider ‘the
a. testing bureau, many whom of were sclentificalty ° trained ;.-
nally, as the'result of an accident, were inclined to be skeptical.
This was -in no way a disadvantage, for ane approached the teste of air-
worthiness with foresight and an enormous amount of research results -
for your benefit!

(And not only i iyou and the fiberglass aircraft manufacturer; other
‘faculties also profited from these studies: for example, it was found that
the value’ of gompresdive strength in the fiber direction, according ta .
correct assumptions, was almost equal to the tensile-strength, uot only
for Fiberglass. but.alse for fir. For years a smaller value had been
taken.

Even so, the studies showed that the strength of fiberglass articles

did not fall, .but instead rese, if one held it at a higher temperature

and then ‘tested it again after cooling. How does this come about?


--- Page 10 ---
loz

thermoplasts

Plastics are built by stimulate their molecules to knot nets or chains.
They go together with regular repeated pattern, (the word "Poly" means
“many-fold"). It is not uncommon for a molecular chain in a polymer to be
made of several thousand links. For some nets it is possible to "de-knot"
them. When such a polymer is warmed, the chains or nets: vibrate more and
become more free to move past each other. The plastic becomes soft and

can be molded; when cooled, it hardens in this form. This can be repeated
over and over. Such polymers are called "thermoplastic" because they become
soft — plastic - when heated.

Expensive machinerv is needed to heat and mold such materials, and they
are also not suitable for aircraft for other reasons. One exception is

’ Plexiglass, used for the canopy.

quroplasts

Epoxy

Cleanliness

Other polymers are wade of nets which’are tied together at a desired time

by chemical reactions so that the entire collection form a rigid network.

When warmed, the net remainsfirmly hound together, and may even form some

new bonds. Such polymers, when they are fully hardened or cured (have many a
inter— chain bonds), do not dissolve easily in solvents, can not be moided
again, and so are formed only once — hopefully in the right shape.

This polymers are called "Guro-plastics" or “thermogetting", because their
shape endures, despite moderate heating or exposure to many solvents

The duroplastics are usually employed in aircraft coustruction and the prin-
cipal type used goes by the name of "epoxy". There are. slight variations
in.the kinda of epoxies available, but most of them -have outstanding strength
and tenacity, as plastics go. They are made by mixing liquid’ resin with har—-
dener; these begin to reant at once to build nets and tie them together, and
before long one has the rigid article. The chemical reactious liberate heat,
and the hotter the mixture, the faster the- reactions go. (Never work with
more than 2 pounds or 1 kilogram, in one pot, because the Bot can get hot
enough to fill a whole factory with fumes!) .

To make articles with the resin, one needs also a wiold, ‘but one can make

.the mold himself. Repairs to such articles can’usually be made more or less

freehand. .... one does not need presses or expensive machinery, steam, elec—
tric power, ete, If necessary, one can get. by: with 2 measuring cups and some
pieces of wood.

And on top of all this, this simple mixture yet ‘pemaide the dest ‘compromise
for all'plastics to be used with fiberglass! Bo 7
Thus it becomes possible for you-to repair your fibargines: ‘sailplanes quite
simply. . 2

It is clear that the chemical reactions to produce’ the’ desizea finished
duroplastic will run properly only when one uses the right materials and
mixes them in the right proportions. As with regular glues, one must not

F
é

“have foreign matter in the glue or on the surfaces’ to be- joined. Especially

deadly to strength are separating agents and substances which can act in
this way: Fats, oils, greases, waxes, silicones — “even & ightly oily
finger which one absent-mindedly ran acrosa bis ‘forehead’ momént before.
And also a drop of acetone in the wroug place cah ruin everything for. you.


--- Page 11 ---
“404

ve have to measure the components of the plastic precisely according to - Chemica
‘sensitive gest This is one of the very few points about which plastics are Teactio
woe - Just imagine a party to which more women than men were invited. ~

Wha long faces, when one girl must sit alone! Fach molecule must

find its partner, otherwise it remains out of the building process -

to pletely deentaee she product. Thus it follows that your mixture is not

Comp.etely joingd together inside, or may not even hard

mixed the wrong. proportions. ons Af you have

For to avoid bigger letdowns you should test the harding conditions
of each charge. Prepare a paper sheet as follows: °

sailplane 14 p-y344

Ny [ aay| time } ‘place resin g {hardener
se | g
{| 233 | fuselage top 400 2g
A [it] 923 | Soectsse 3

AG 1 left wing, top =~
Mu AA | AQ pos. 4500 nose 50 4G

e
a
—~
i =
=
is)
1m
wm
2
>
a)
| mo ct
(| 16 mom @
i ta
| ct

From each charge you pick a little drop in the mentioned field of list.

Tf you put the sheet on the central heating or a plate warmer, you will

note very easy if the charge is o.k. (page 114: quality test)

You may insert after hardening into the life act of the plane.

Consider very carefully during preparing the mix how long you will open
have to work. Thin layers of resin, especially if they are filled with time
fibers, will harden slowlier than the big pot in your hand. But in

ene ting they will come the ;pdint that the resin will harden, equal

if your work is ready or not! ,

For thaslyou need a carefully work preparation. Play in your head
the whole running of the work or, for 4 longer action,make notices.
The last point is: resin mixture.

helpful that you prepare, perhaps on 2 tables,
ings: on the one all parts which are pre-
brushes, - all what has to be exact cleaned}
ad auxiliary parts, which are prepared with
net allowed to idle away any time during the
t wait .

In a bigger work it
in order all neces
pared for gluing,
on the other all.
separating fluid. Tt
work -— the resin doss ?


--- Page 12 ---
AOS

Heating

“famper ing

You can use the mixture aa long as it can thouroughly wet and penetrate the
Siass fibers, so that they become almost invisible: tough, stringy resin is
useless; one can still smear it on unimportant placés, like a nick in the

garage; the toughness indicates. thatthe molecular net-building process -is

well along, and. the nets are torn apart vy stirring and smearing, 1

As you know.,from other glues, it is hot good to disrupt a chemical vTeaction
by stirring, kneading, or premature removal of clamps and fixtures; the? -
networks are thereby broken apart and don't join together too wekl again.

Tt is not possible to say exactly how loug a resin mixture can be used. :
Large masses react more quickly than small ones; the reaction goes faster

in warm;rooms’ than in cold ones (and not linearly with temperature, but:in
a curve:which goes up more steeply, the warmer the rooms. In summer you; had
better hurry!) and new, fresh materials hardeu more rapidly than those which
have been stored for a time. : :

As a place to bang your hat, you can take it that 100 g, or 4 ounces of:

" mixture! in a cotfee-cup in a room at 189 G or 650 F will pegin to harden

our’ (warm) band, it will
fabric or on your sail—
“tb begins. “to ‘harden att 650R,

in about 20 - 30 minutes. If you bold the cup in
harden sooner. jWhen you place this resin on glas
plane in thin Layers, 4 to 6 hours may go before

; Z -
‘Our epoky theniforms its molecular network at.normal room temperatures, at

least 15°C or 60°F. (Some industrial types require.much higher temperatures).
Lower temperatires lead to blocking of the bardening; -they ‘produce alsg a
thick paste which is hard to work, so that you:gst too mach resin. inthe
article that you are making. . woe . ita at OU cs

One can accelerate the hardening by warming. One muat be careful with jutre-
red lamps or sp, because ‘they may produce extrem local heating’ and damage nay
reault. Hot aik is the best; for small pleces, a hotpad will do. When the
area is large, so that a hot air blower won't suffice one‘’can make a tempo-—
vary tent from plastic sheets, scrap material, wood, foam plastic, ect}, 30
as to maintain a uniform temperature over the part. One can put a thermome—
terginto an average part'of the tent to observe the temperatura. -

4

Tf it is difficult to lead the warmth to the wet resin |rea, one can warm
the part after it has hardened at room temperature. The plastic may seen
quite ready to you after-a few days at room temperature, but it really is
not. Its strength and hardness increase with time, This may take a month at
normal temperature. Probably most of the active ends of the molecules are
then bound, so that they can no longer find their Partners so easily. But
we can help them by warming. This is also done during construction; ali
parts are held at 50°C for 12 Hours. The full strength of the plastic,
which’ previously was guaranted to 40°C, falls somewhat during the warming;
the vetworks become very slightly looser, and so the articles should not be
subjected to stress during’ this warming. After thig treatment, almost all

‘of the last reactive moleculeshave become a part of the network, the network -

is stronger than before, and now we can fully load our article up to 54° or
129°F without fear. *

For this reason you will find the tables in the handbooks.

Nearly all "classic" fiberglass sailplanes are made from a resin
type like this: the good old "Epikote- Laromin' combination.

(Libelle, SALTO, BS 1, ASW 15, Cirrus, LS 1 etc. ete.)


--- Page 13 ---
Note well:These sailplanes are made so that their outer surfaces are white.
Other light colours also remain cool in the sun, but black or dark colours
(e.g., numbers, decorations) can very easily reach temperatures of 70° G
and mare. At such spots the usual high safety factor of strength will not
be available.

Because the manufacturers were angry about this low temperature
strengith(in spite of the feeling of the pilot if his cockpit has
only a temperature of 40° c - have you tried?’So it may be diffi-
“eult to bring a sailplane under full load in flight conditions wit
a structure temperature of 54° C)

- so they have used in newex:planes resin systems which are ad-
judtable in open time and temperature strength by using different
hardeners . :

Hereby you can observe that, in general, a hardener which cure 4
resin slow has also a lower tamperature strength then a hardener
which works faster. In some systems you can even mix the hardeners
and so obtain a sliding border between the asked requirements.

Sorry in normal case the fast working hardeners are more thixotrop
then the slower ones.

‘mm the new generation of gliders we have the so-called
‘interim + hardened"resins. This means; the resin cures in
room temperature so that you can it put out of the mold
with care, but it is not really harden for carry a strength.
Then the part will be tempered,in.temperatures up to 120° ¢,
but in the most cases in such which can be reached with
normal equipment ( perhaps 80 - 99 ). This resins have a
strength in temperatures up to 80 (C which may allow nearly
coloured gliders...

In no case you can harden any resin with any hardener. The
iystems react only in their borders and in the prescribed
kind and quantity.

AOE

higher
strength

adjustabl:

interim

changeable


--- Page 14 ---
temper
proof

field
repair

fire
hazard

A0F

Jn your manufacturer advise you will find from what kind of resin your
plane is made, and with what kind of resin it may be repaired, One

can think that you can repair certainly a plane from the good old Epi-
kote ‘Laromin type with a resin system of higher strength, but not

vice versa! Lo :

Certainly you have to fulfil this demanded tempering procedure also for
each repair work. And it is important that this is documented.

Do not be afraid if any government office require the use of sinful
experienced aid tools as a temperature writer. Because our work is
instglled for the use of hot air blowers so that is necessary to observe
the area all time, it is possible to notice the teperature aljhours

and to inset them in a list as this:

(~~ ; ‘ LSA‘'D -44a4
. 2 ‘

Di

t
Y
measure - Tempering tent .
'point 1 c @).
a AF emda ade me ae ee
tempering report from 90, Ad. BB :
time: HS] My ‘
0 62° | 60" ;
Ao 64? | 62° |
AA. etc. 7

(with a lot of things it is similar: Bither you can replace them with
fantasy through others, or you search in your neighbourship to lean
the expensive tool)

Some fast-curing systems can be used for "field repairs",
They harden in minute- times. Because their properties in
regard of the conditions of these field- repairs are not
definitable exactly, you should avoid to use them for main
structures.

fhe components of the plastic, resin and hardener, are not as inflammable
aS, Say;a laquer. The hardened resin does not burn easily and the fire goes
out when the flame is removed. But it makes much soot when it burns. The
woite laquer is also essentially a resin (polyester); and falls into the
same class. But its solvents are easily inflammable liquids such as ace-
tone, laquer thinners, etc. The working with the chemicals from a fiber
glass ship will need therefore as much or as little caution-aa with ordi-
hary aircraft . (Cigarettes alsa should be-put out before entering
such a workshop!) : er ee .


--- Page 15 ---
.As for a room for working with resin, the same “recommendations hold as you
already know for glueing work: dry, moderate, constant temperature, grease—
free working surfaces. The overall smell is uegligible.. Facilities should
be provided for washing the hands with warm water. It therefore occurs to
one that there should be no thoughts against using the rooms of one's own
home for fiberglass repair, although, to be aure, ane must, on account of
the shameless stubborness of hardened resin spots ‘on kitchen. tables, etc.,
be prepared to reckon with political difficulties...

Some parts of tools are attacked by the liquid resin or especially: by- the
solvents, for example, the beautiful red laquer on paint~brushes on putty—
Iknives. Obtain unpaintened, rather cheap brushes for the work, ray. sticks.
for stirring, dnd not colored rags but instead white goods... ,

The resin mixing can be done in vessels of glass or ‘porcelain ov tin-cans —
— they must be ‘unquestionably clean. If one often works with the resin,!

it may be advantageous to use small paper cups. They must be unwaxed!

One can use them again when the previous batch of: resin has hardened in
them. ' :

Ti while stirring, you loosen the remnants of an earlier batch of resin,
From the vessel walls, that's annoying. But dissolving ia not possible for
hardened resin, not at all. This’ hard realization may oceur to' you when
you have let flecks’ of resin harden, unnoticed, ‘on your: sunday. quit. :

As long: as the resin mixture appears soft, it can: pe dissolved vin acetone;
MEK, laquer thinners ,_ etc.

The resin can be stored in clean tin~. cans. The hardener. moat ‘be kept in
well-galvanized cans, but even better in glass,and well- sealed, becansp |
it reacts withthe oxygen in the air and orystallizes. ‘After’ “that, it.

- reacts only poorly with the resin.

If hardener inva well-sealed container nevertheless becomes Toaded’ with
erystals, like ‘old honey, that's asign that it's too’ cold. ut it in a’
warn place. or in warm water, and at 85° F it shoura ‘Yecome' all liquid.

You must note well that the resin, and especially the. hardener ;, is. poisonous.
fake care that-it is kept away from food. Worst’of all is “to ‘got it in the
eye. Wash it ag once with running water and go to’ the’ doc’ “even if it.
doesn't’ seem 8a bad. A chemical description of: the’ hardener’ is: ‘piven or-hanel-
books i ij: the dodtor will know from that what he can do

vany persons ‘are allergic, or very sensitive ‘to. certiin ‘uubatihdés. The
famous hay fever is nothing but an allergy to the pollens of platits. Some
people will. algo be allergis to the resin, The aymtoms fade. away,. ‘3S aooh.as
one no longer comes in cottact with the ivritatiig ‘substanoe. In any cage:
avoid unnecessary contact of the skin with the chemical, wash the hands. often
with? soap (youltll do that anyway because they ge eaticigr). ianaitt necessary
work with rubber or plastic gloves. : : : ;

Remember that fardened vesin is chemically absolutdly: neutral. If you climb
out‘of the ship after an eight-hour ‘flight with a ‘runny nose ,* ‘or you dqn't
feel well, it's surely for sume other reason. :

A005

workshop

Tools-

Dilution

Storage

Poison!

Allergies


--- Page 16 ---
199

Glass Now we've discoursed a long time about resin. But in away, it's of secondery

. importance; it is a necessary evil which we must employ in order to hold the
glass fibers in their places so as to direct their strength in the beat ways.
The fibers'themselves have tensile strengths about twice that of good steel
and about 20 times that of the resin. .

The glass fiber is the real strong man!

Strength This extraordinary strength of a material, which we tised to regard ag being
brittle, springs from the surface tension of a very tiny fiber, about 9
microns or 0.36 thousandths of an inch in diameter. The tensile strength of .
such a fiber lies around 14,000 ke/sq om, or about 200,000 psi; ita compres—

’ sive strength is almost exactly the same. Presumably, in order ta put the

fibers to the utmost use, oné must orient them in the direction of the lines .
of force and anchor them under all circumstancea in this position, specially.
when compressive forces are working and the fibers would like to prefer the
way of bending or buckling.

Fiber— To this now we need the plastic matrix. This combination we fame "glass

glass fiber reinforced plagtic ", "GFE" or "FRE", or Fiberglass". It is clear that
the strength of the combination depends on two. factors: The ratio by volume
of the strong glass fibers to the weaker plastic matrix, and the lay or di-
rection taken by the fibers. :

A laminate made of parallel strands — "roving" -— and -plastic can possess a
tensile strength up to about 8000 ke/sq.cm, or. 110,000 psi. The approach to
the maximum depends, on bow closely one comes to the optimal fiber volume
fraction of 60%, and the line-up of the fibers parallel with the imposed
stress. oO

Taminates made of woven fiberglass cloth are Somewhat weaker on account of
the weaving of the fibers and run from 2000 to 6000 Ke/sq.cm.or 30,000 to

90,000 psi — in the fiber directions, naturally! Consider once 8, Plece of

fabric in the diagonal direction ana You'll see why alignment is sao important

‘ Laminates made from random short fibers - "mat" — ‘reach strengths of only
about 1000 ke/aq.cm.or 15,000 psi. -_ So :

i

We see that one can buy glass fibers in different’ forms

abt .

Mats Mats of. unorientated short fibera — not too suitable “for use sailplanes
. because fibers can't follow the lines of stress too well. And they use -
up a lot of resin in making the article.

Cloth Woven fabrics, including those with a great preponderance of fibers in
one direction and only a few at vight angles, are available in many types,
weaves, finishes, weights, ete., for simple or highly curved shapes,

1 for strongly directional or more equelly divided stress patterns,

Prefabs Pre— impregnated woven fabrics are made which carry resin in a soft state,
When such material is shaped to. the desired form and then heated, the

resin hardens. However, such material ig not very suitable for our hand
work because the pressing and heating is difficult, : :

fhe threads should be in every Case not or not hard twisted.


--- Page 17 ---
ROVING
MAT
Unorientated fibers “

held together with
a plastic binder

CLOTH

Plain weave:
over one,

under one.

Warp and weft
have about

the same number
of fibers and
atrength. :
Used for moat
flat surfaces.

vu a .
Unidirectional weave.

A special kind of plain weave. There

. ave many fibers in one direction,
but only enough to hold things to~
gether in the other direction, Such
cloth is used in the outer wing skin
-of the Libelle, and in place of the
rovings in the wing spars of some
aircraft.

Twill weave.

This weave commonly has equal fiber
content in warp and weft, but its
special weave: over one, under two,
makes it conform well to rounded
places and compound corves.


--- Page 18 ---
AAA

Rovings

Fiber
Coating

“iberglass
Proportion

carbon
fibers

Rovings - long, long oifidles of parallel fibers in ‘various numbers per
bundle, are aboutithe hardest to handle, but once they are well placed
one can best satisfy the demands of following the lines of stress .with.
fibers. With them‘ one.éan span most directly between two pointse."One can |
reinforce edges with fhem or fasten down fittings. And it's not necessary
to bore holes in. ie main spars; instead, using rovings one ca ttach,
the necessary assembly-pins and sockets aa firmlv as a bough is fastenad
to'a tree. The fibers .are not cut off; there is no loss of strength. “*

All glass fibers used for reinforcing are coatéd with a substance during .
their manufacture which results in'a better bond between glass and resjo.
Furthermore, the glas's.would break easier without this protective coating.
Do not permit .the fibers to get wet or come in contact with thinners ot
cleaning materials. Do not heat it either. One should take care to keep the
glass flat or smoothly rolled, so that it does not become weakened by
kinking. It can be protected from dust by plastic sheets.

‘Because we build airtraft as lightly as we possibly can, we are concerned
to develop the grip on: the fibers with the least possible resin, exactly
enough. that the product doesn't show white spots from unwetted fibers, but
not so much’ that there are "puddles" of resin. For the most part. we are
unable to reach the optimum standard of 60% glass to 40% resin:in éur hand—
crafting methods. He who lays up spars, ribs, and skin with 60% fiber
attains the highest strength with the least weight and space. i

We find this optimum ratio in the BS and the Tibelle in for example the

wing. spars. ’

In the most main spars are used rovings. In some cases they are mad@®: from
unidirectional layers, but these spars are softer than they from rovings

(lower amplitude).

Who gains a little more experience in the PRP technigue will note that
in the older fiberglass planes this system of following the stress lines
is fulfilled more consequently than in younger ones. In this time the
pressure of economic was still unknown... —"~

Sometimes we will find after remove the gelcoat black main spars or
completely black interieurs of the planes!

We have to do with carbon fibers. They will be manufact from eraphit

or plastic material which will be carbonized.

The material has a higher strength than glass fibers. But their extension
is not So high. Spares from carbon are very stiff; for this one can
make very thin wings not from other material.

Carbon fibers. have a different crash behaviour than fiberglass.

The long period of extend. which we know from glass, or the long phasis
of grewing white is not available in carbon. If they failure, they do
it apruptly. (Watchers of a carbon crash are speaking about a "black
explosion".

The high damping effect which we know from fiberglass is inapplicable.

Repairs of carbon fiber parts are in the system nearly the

same than FRP parts. Caution: it is difficult to observe the
througout wetting of all fibers! :
Carbon fibers are in this time more expensive than fibers from

glass. But all is relative: if you are so clever to go apart
from a sandwich by using carbon - you have made a good business.


--- Page 19 ---
Also during working and repair we have to observe something;

basically are available the Same kinds and clothes as from glass, also
the same weaving sizes. put we are dependent of. the statement of glider
manufacturer what kind of carbon cloth is to find in what part of plane
because this is nearly impossible to constate by eye-look.

Also there are mix clothes: chain from glass, shut from carbon.

Carbon fibers are no more inflammable than glassfibers. But they conduct
electric stream! It may happen that your electtic handtool may have a
‘ghort" and works no more. For this you should use air-pressure tools.

Tf under the white surface during remove it comes not greexpr black but
yellow, than we have to do with Kevlar fibers. (Aramid). Here we have
also the same cloth types, but no rovings. This type of fibers has

also a high tension strength, put a low strength for pressure. Tt will
used on places who the material should be very Light, and in con-
structions where the high tension strength came in play.

Aramid fibers are not resistent against UV- light. For this they must be
protect against sun. Also you should remark that they do not like to

be worked after curing, they fringe. Tt is nearly impossible to cut

them with normal scissors,

[Tt seems logical that it is impossible to repair one type of fibers with
an other. Because we meet sometimes a combination material - f.%. 1 layer
glass,,,1 layer carbon or similar - it is indispensable to ask the manu-
facturer.

The development of fibers is not resting on one spot. There were tests
with bor fibers. Also thermoplast fibers are in the development.
foncerning resin, also here we have tests with new polyester develop-
ments, or materials we know in the past as thermoplasts. For to be aure
from surprises, it is necessary to contact the manufacturer. Pach of them
must record ll materials used in the plane in its maintenance beoks.

gxample: the etiffness of the carbon fibers provokes to use them in air-
craft parts we had never think on it: there are pushrods or drivingshafts

of them, for instance.

{he fiberglass aircraft constructox.tiérefore makes his own materia!
goes along; he creates his airoraft from an embryo, out of the badic YAW
materials, so to speak. No one has ‘Looked into a metal spar. mor iuto <the. .
laminations of a wood structure. \With, fiberglass the construction is.6ut in
the open from’ the beginning; there, are iscarecely any casting flawa or-resia.
lumps which can't be noted. And ‘més{iparts can be thoroughly inapectad "~~
after curing by singly illuminating: them from behind with a atronug Lape. ° am

AAD

Kevlar

new
fibers


--- Page 20 ---
Add

sandwich;

balsa

conticell

tubus

Hexcel

Rohacell

Material
list

The first PRP Sailplanes had balsawood as core inside between
the FRP layers. In this time we had no other,

The balsawood has a really good strength for tension and pression;
for this it takes part in this direction on the structure.

Planes with balsawood cores have for this 2 bit higher wing
oszillation.

But the balsa supports not so good against buckling. Also it
is the first which breaks when the wing is strongly bended,

Caused by its low ‘extension.

If a balsa— sandwich ig broken, you must slope it as normal

wood.

The most used sandwich material is "Conticell", a pyc foam.

[ts elasticity is good, but against buckling it's also not

So very well. And in temperature strength it is not an optimum.
But because it is manvfactured in large plates, it is not

80 expensive to manufact the pieces for wing sandwich layers.
If you are not very attentive the Conticell soaks a lot of
resin, and your Sailplane part gets very heavy.

If you have only a little repair spot, it is not necessary to
Slope it exactly. You place only the little spot with a mix.
ture of resin and microballoon (see page 301)

Breaks in Conticell layers should be investigated with care.
It is possible that you find under a little crack of 3 few
coms nearly half a meter loosed inner FRP layer!

Some sailplanes have sandwich layers from so-called "tubus"
plates. They are made from a thermoplast material (polystyrol
etc). We have learned tha't these materials may contact not so
very good to fiberglass. This may be the reason that this
construction method ig not widely used. On the other hand
these tubus and honeycomb- sandwich layers have a very good
resistence against buckling.

For this f.i. the "Airbus" -ig using in many parts a sandwich
layer from honeycomb made of nylon paper which effects a
really good connection to the FRP caused by a rough cutting
of their thickness, but with some resin types you need
"tricks", The material is called "Nomex" or "Gexcell", Tt

is very light and.to fit very easy in repair spots; but its
price is really high.

For to obtain a. good sonneetion between Hexcel and TRP “layer you should
try to get little "feet" on the walls of the honeycomb. That means to try
that the resin runs alittle upward of them. Pither you can use a special
resin for this, or you san help yourself on a mechanical way: to wet the
walls by using a brush, or a piece of carpet. PAULL

Under some PRP layers you will find a white sandwich material. This is

a derivate from the Plexiglass of our canopies, ("Rohacell" ) It is very
homogene. light and not so resin-gsreedy. than Gonticell, but more brittle.
Tt is used in some tail faces,

For newer FRP gliders you will find a register of all used
materials of the plane in the maintenance book. If you cannot
find such, please Look for the so called "type attendant",
The LBA wikL help you to find out him.

Hach manufacturer delivers the materials used in his planes.
But if you have a good reputable LTB in your area: the buying
there may be more cheaper because everybody knows what to buy
minimum charges will cost today.

These LTRs are responsible also to a quality control,


--- Page 21 ---
AA

QUALITY TESTS

- Mistakes in a PRP part may have naturally two sources: glass or resin.

The glass portion has to fulfil the following requirements:

it must have the predetermined amount and kind of glass in the right
direction; the finished piece must be a translucent gray—green; hence it
must not have white spotg nor obviously visible glass structure, If thése
are seeu,the glass was moist or had the wrong finish, so that the resip
aid not stick on it. :

The piece is stronger, the higher the glass content and the more appropriate
the lay of the glass fibers. Snarls, crooked or displaced fibers in the
weave reduce the strength. . ‘

Imperfections in the resin component are more frequently as those in the.
glass. The parts must be clean, thoroughly saturated and cannot show any
a : * : i

white spots.

The resin must be harden completely. Poorly hardened resin doesn't give
enough support to prevent kinking of any fibers. One can check the harfening
of the resin hy the following tests: H

Any little points sticking out of the piece must, be as sharp as needles and
preak off in a brittle way.:If you can merely pend --them,’-the’ hardening!.ia .in-
complete. © : . ‘ . : . :

The left-over resin in the mixing pot shovld not be impressed by a. finger:
nail by the’ next day (say after 12 bours)at’18°C. or 65°F minimum temperature.
After about 24 hours, a hammer blow should split the masa‘of resin into -
splinters; the splinters should be prittle, yellowish, and clear like ‘glass.

One can aliso detect inadequate hardening-when he works on the piece:
such parts,;-when filed, sanded, or drilled, are somewhat smeary. 'The loose
particles cut. off ure like bread crumbs and not like ‘powder. As one wqrks
in this soft material, the glass fibers may: try to stand up or even tear loose.
The sound of these parts is not bright and hard but dull. They do not resist
againat bending and don't-break suddenly, with: cracking. and splitting, but

> '

more like soft plastic, e.g. polyethylene. .

Often the.trouble with a soft piece is simply that’ tt rasin hasn't, had time
to havden yet: - perhaps it was kept tao cool - and one can cure this by
avacming it up for a while. . poe :

We can establish whether thia is the trouble by keeping. the. leftover resin
in a warm, place (baking oven!) and no#icing latest aftersan' hour whether it
has gotten, harder or not.. Naturally we test it after,it'as cooled off.. .

Tf we have made an error, in the preparation of the resin, ex we used a brush
wet with ‘Acetone in the mixture, then nothing can- be- done about it, exept to
startiover. But it is better to have that sinking’ feeling on the ground than
in the air... . , .


--- Page 22 ---
2.00

eke for roth for FRP planes

You know that a plane is not able to fly without a minimum of paper.
The system of these papers are different in the countries and con—
tinents. Here you find the system of Germany (Luftfahrt- Bundesamt =
LBA).

During its manufacturing, every plane will be observed by a licensad
improvement person. He controls during the work of the plane if it si
accordance with its drawings, manufacturing advises and other papers:
which are-important for its identits, Without this procedure the plé
will not get its piece improvement certificate, and without this you
will not get. the G of A.

piece

}

' Every year - the date is caused by the date of piece improvement ~ the
yearly plane needs a yearly inspection. Tt is to be attested that the plane
is airworthy by following the manufacturing documents valid in this
moment.
We tell not a secret that the quality of this improvements is very
‘different. For this it would be good for every owner of a plane if
he would be able himself to check his plane. Undispensable will be
this in case of a hard landing or other happenings.

The different manufacturers have in stock improvement lists of their

designs. On the base of them you can check your plane. In doubt

you should order a check list for the "Long Service Check"which is

obligatory for every fiberglass plane after 3000 hours. This list

will guide you through the whole plane. Also the little drawing on,’

page 24% will help you. oo
E L

Some sequences before you have read an important set: documents valic
in this moment, .

The world is turning, and also manufacturers of sailplanes grew
wiser (sometimes). If such a manufacturer notes that the part x
should be replaced by the part y because this is easier to control,
without a necessary of Security, he amend his LBA for a ‘Technical
Bulletin" (TM). This T™ can be followed by the sailplane owner but
must not. Both, the old and the new Solution, are valid.

TB

If the manufacturer has the opinion that the security is in play,
because any part of the plane may have a shadow to be not so sure
as planned in design, he amends by the LBA an "Airworthiness Di-
rective" (AD in-English, 47a in German). Also the DBA can order

an AD if doubts insecurity of the plane are shown.

An AD must be followed inside of the term decided in the AD, other-
wise the plane is out of law. An 4D of the LBA will be send to

all Governments where the type of plane is flying, for the propo-
sal that these officials will send the AD to all owners of the

type and also to all licensed workshops.

Without a fulfilled ap you will not get 2 yearly Cod!

--- Page 23 ---
2O-4

If you have the wish to change any little thing in your plane, self
you should be sure that this may not be a so-called "big change". designs
This must be amended by the Government!

For to clear this question you should ask the next improvement
inspector or licensed workshop.

Tf an inspector will find such a, change not identical with
the plane's documents, he can refuse the CoA!

Herewith be spoken a word in favor of the improvement persons;
certainly in the world we have bad peoples, perhaps also under
us, but in the normal case you can be sure that the inspector
is willing to protect you and othergfrom harm. For this you
should ask your inspector better one time morethan less. (In
our country we can say that inspectors and LBA are the best,
information sources you can find).

What is to do if it has "bomped"? damages,

Every damage which injures the airworthiness eliminates the
CoA. : :

_My experience is that the state of airworthiness will be
adapted very different by the owners of the panes.

Certainly the plane is no more airworthy if the tube of the
AST has removed from the instrument. But this will not bring
in action an inspector, certainly. .

[In other cases an owner found his plane airworthy in apite of
‘ the gaps and crashes in the FRP surface.

That means: nobody until now was able. to definate exactly
what is a big damage of the plane, or in following a "thig repaiz".

Here you see that there is a wide room of play for the respon-.
sibility of the owner. Principally you can say that every damage
touching the structure or the controls of the plane should be
discussed with the inspector.

Mo decide this you have the help of the check list of your
manufacturer. .


--- Page 24 ---
osenheim
ules

Sly peoples have try to eliminate this dilemma. by setting up rules which
Separates the damages in classes (30 called "Rosenhsimer Regels", 80 named
from a plastic institute at Rosenhein, Bavaria)s

class 1: big areas of distructdonwhich demands 2 partial replacement

of the aircraft pars or 2 big repair. "his means damages which interrupt
main strength lines, specially if in primary or secondary parts strength
connections are interrupt, Peamples; tail broken away, Wing main connec-—
tion damaged, main Spar damaged or broken, cockpit frame broken, control
surface out of place (aileron. rudder. elevator), :

class 2; holes and brakes in a laminate up to ca 200 mm in each direc-

tion: damages which have broken all sandwich layers top and bottom, f.i.
transport damage, dropped wing.

class -3; little holes or damages in the surface without destructions
of inner layer, Example; crashes or chamfers which cutted the outer
laminate layer.

class 4; eroded spots, Crashes and dents in the surface which have not
damaged the FRP layer. Typical: crashed from placing in hangar.

Primary structures: this are such concerning main organs of the plane
(wing, fuselage, tail) .

Mein secundary structures are f.i. control surfaces, flaps, airbrakes.
Auxiliary secundary structures are f.1, gear closing plates, canopy,
inspection hole covers, baldachinparts.

In theory this seems very well, but in practice the border between little
and big repair will be anywhere between class 3 and 4 ~ that means therefore:
fluidable. why this is so important? Following the most government rules

the little repair can do in border of maintenance of the plane, perhaps

by such a "expert person", this may be the owner or a person which knows

the plane since many years of maintenance. The big repair, contrary,

must be done by a licensed firm (German; LTB = licensed repair shop).


--- Page 25 ---
203

For to avoid disagreable discussions, one should in principle a11 cases
which touch in any kind the carrying structure or the control system °~
of the glider, in advance clear with an inspector.

The following two pages are borrowed from the Long Time Inspection check
Program of the SALTO. Hach who like to buy a FRP sailplane should metho
be armed’ with this. They are helping also for each who will check

sucha plane by other reasons.

After this follows4 pages of a check list, which allows to note after
each question the reason of critism and later the restoration of them.
If you have worked through thia list, you can look for the visit of
your yearly inspection with calmness.

Tf it has crashed, the list may help for checking: may I able to

maintain the damage myself? What parts are necessary to order, and

which material?

What means, properly, "Long Time Inspection Program? long tir

When the FRP planes are just coming from their egg-shells, nobody check

knows how long this new material would beware its full strength, and
if, perhaps during the time,may shown some objections.

For this the first types of the new material are designed and inspec-
ted for 3000 hours service time.

But, in most cases, it happen very fast that the 3000 hours are ful-
filled. What now?

Manufacturer and LBA agreed that the white birds were subjected to

a check through their whole structure all 3000 hours. If there were
not/found any mistakes on the FRP, they may work further {900 hours.
How the check will have its program is decided by the manufacturer.
You may find notices around this temporary tests in the papers of
the plane (one reason more for the axiom; the check of a plane [
would like to buy begins at the papers!)

I regret that the most programs of this have their most weight on
the plastic and less to other import parts af the bird. But we have
the experience that there iv still no case ~ the time has nibbled
on the plastic, but more that other materials of the bird are con-
founded. The catastrophic cases of pushrods which are rusted from
inside belongs in this rubric! And such cases are not depending of
the service time but of the life time!

(For this the Long Time Inspection Program the SALTO demands
a througout. inspection of the bird, “all par equal what material,
and each 1000 hours or 10 years, what may pren easier).


--- Page 26 ---
LO
7 —S --
doktor fiberglas— check list le. a (3)
. - wo ,,,
Drawing | ab Tet .
No 1 SALTO~ part ok,ok, na, statement: ok
AIRPLANE ASSEMBLED:
All main connecting parts should be clean and green, i.a. without
paint. All parts of the airplane are to be washed and cleaned, the
connecting parts are to be clean and lubricatect,”" .
. Spherical bell bearings and Junction jaws are positionned accordingly,
air brake handlaver is in closed, but not im locked position
i —_
ING: *
Left and right are movable without problems
(the use of an aluminum bay is allowed). *
jt
middle Left and right are movable by hand without
attachment} problems (use of a small aluminum hammer is
allowed) ‘
bolts | Remove again. | eee ete see —
Left and right can be screwed without problems.
There is no slackness. . .
The screw-down bolts cannot be moved in the
axial direction and-are-nct and cannot be turned
connection} The connection bolts have no slackness. in
pins the ball and socket joint
The distance between the junction pin and
the ball and socket joint is not more than
1.5 mm.
. i 4
aileron and | the connection bolts of the ailerons and
aitbrake the air brakes have a distance of about
connection

Actuation

2mm to the end of jaw gap

shafts are not movable axially in the

slackness.

fuselage . Strong shake (neither tangen-
tial nox vertical) does not produce any
noise,

TAILPLANE:

The tailplane bushing and cones move
together without problems (with only a
slight push forward),

The connecting screw can be serewed at
jJeast 3 threads before it is tightened.
The U-plate is almost parallel ta the
safety stirrup.
can be inserted into the U-plate and
removed without problems.

The tailplane is tight in the bushings,
there is neither tangential nor vertical

has no slackness in the rudder cavity. The
rudder has no axial slackness in the tailplane

The safety mechanism

The tail control mechanism.

aileron
fasteged:Maximum
of the free aileron.
Maximum 3

airbrake

Control Surface Slackness Allowed:

With the control stick and one aileron

With the control stick and pedal fastened:

trailing edge at the fuselage (individual
check of elevator and rudder).

Not locked -maximum 5 mm to one another.
Axial maximum 1.5 mm.

=

4

mm at the outer end edge

mm at the tail rudder at the


--- Page 27 ---
doktor fiberglas- check list 8

Drawing
No

SALTO- part

pb
28
OD ia

mt TE

no, atatement:

ok

joke oF

Airplane steadily mounted on an even surface.
Main connecting bolts and tail plane connec~
tion bolts fastened. 7

Ailerons and rudders at zero.

Air brakes closed, tire pressure 2,0 bax

“b

geometry

Connecting Lines between wing tips
and tail tips are parallel.
Distances between wing tips and
tail tips are equal.

es aa

basic |
adjustment

Control stick in middle position—
ailerons axe at zero,

Control stick in middle position-
hoth tail rudders are at zero,

In doing this, the square bar of
the stick is nearly in the center
of the rectangular opening of the
knee board and the trim adjustment

ds neutral.

If you move the stick forward and
back, both tail rudders work

nearly equal.

passage
freedom

All rudders are movable in each

handling combination and each

position of airbrake lever and

drag parachute connections.

No excessive chaff marks in the

cackpit side tunnels.

No minimum gap of less than 3 mm ¢
between two handling parts

exeption: full pulled stick, full rudder
ageinst half pulled brake chute lever,

suspicious places: (check all handiing combinations) *

aileron control lever vertical under
stick against rudder yoke;

two lag rocker arm under the ying
bridge right against aileron pushrod;
tail control pushrod left against
airbrake bell cranic ;

tail guide lever againet tail chute lever;
airbrake lever in tunnel

against tail pushrod in the tunnel

airhrake

The locked aixrbrakes need ahout
§-8 kg to be opened Perce phi bte ;
(use @ spring seale, posit
protection plywood piece at the trailing
edge of brake )

Control ceflection declared in the-
inspection list can be realized.

ioned with a

canopy

The canopy rocker arm does not
right wing root.

touch th

vibration

al frequency is ok
__. cyclas/minute

All subsequen

stands:

All inspection data are recorded.

Weight and i

und are faultless
Loqbaok.
changes are

ce was done.


--- Page 28 ---
206

Date

Reason:

PRUFLIS @ #B Check bist

jt

(Ail

air
rakes

state

re eht

to do

hinges

gluing

end ribs

balance pl. |

durface

state

end ribs

drive bear.

fit i

play, fasten

surface

a a

ail
lates

state

resin worl

fittings

bearings

‘surface

—}

cudder

sxLevator

state

bearings
eS

inside

balance

surface

+ .in order

not correct

is]

not a

Hy

BA


--- Page 29 ---
2¢

)

: asues UT,
i

sasTou:

an

J

YUSMS AOU

sdez

«8UOTLOOTIOD

srequntu

aoezins-

4—

feta 4jyeus

“TTS ‘ATID

eaptaq ‘Tte

SeuUT IES

sereds W

| asol ania

weepo

paqosuuo tore Tt?

“TUOOsTD

ayeqs saut


--- Page 30 ---
208

found

canopy glass

+

to do

frame

. +
fittings
~ 1

seal

—___|

—-

fusel. state

resin work

gluing

hook nose

|

it a.G.

pitot

feet contr

rope conn, °

hand contr

tail contr

ail, control

airbralke c,

Main conn.

4

bagg. comp.

conn. comp.

main gear

tail wheel

tail conn,

canopy conn,

trim equ.

electric

1


--- Page 31 ---
Main conn.”

found

to do

Ok.

eee oe
mont F271 conn.

-

+
control conn, | :
| 7
ail. work
anc = +
- deflect. | |
tail work ‘|
- deflect.
airbrake work
ao a
in sense _|
+ -

panel

1

Instr. state ;

+—t

airspeed
- —
altitude
j____f
Vario 1 Lod aa
2 ;
|
Compass '

radio

iquipm.

harness
pocket | 4.
stick sack im
eovers | 4 a |
securies t
diac. part r
u date
to

TY etal 7

a

I. operate


--- Page 32 ---
Q40

Self
inspection

yearly
inspection

buy 2
FRP plane

Sometimes it is not so simple to find damages.

Put the parts so that daylight or sun nay come

in an angle to them. Certainly the part should

be good cleaned from dust etc. Only then you will
note little cracks or gaps - under which they

may concealed reasonnable big crashes. FRP springs
back in its starting position!

Added to this you should inspect the sandwich
layers by "pick-pick" with the end of a pencil
or so.

fuselage: try to insert a little stick lamp into the
fuselage in a dark surrounding. You will see exactly
each repair spot, each cragh.

Preparing of a yearly inspection:

For every inspection you need not only a prepared plane,

The plane's papers should be chronological in order,

all ordered AD's should be done,

all time limits‘of equipment should be observed,

the installed eqhipment shotthd be in accordance with the
. equipment List

the weight and balance repdrt should be valid for this

equipment
the log book should be completed and settled up.

Time is money - this is specially an inspector's set!

If you wish to buy such a plane for yourself or your club,
please avoid the mistake which may cost you perhaps the life:
to sit into the plane after a short explication by the ower
and to take off!

The check of an unknown sailplane beging at the plane's papers.
Without ~to know: the weight of the plane, its present C.¢,
position, how big is the possible payload - without this the
test flight will be a punishable carelessness |

You should overthink that a bird with high performance in
each case has alsa a high wing aspect ratio. This means a
small area of possible C,&;range. And a plane moving behind
the allowed back ¢.G. may have an un-controlled behaviour.

Added to this, each plane will have its good or bad proper—
ties. Not only by type; each bird is manufactured by hand
and a human hand is not an electronic control!

For this the first action of check ig the study of the
papers and the Elight and Service Manual.

Conscientious holders ef a plane may demand you before
a flight in their plane to confirm in writing that you
have read the 7.5.M and also understand it.


--- Page 33 ---
& a4

’

ETeNSN UBYA, Gatsva STAT
‘uty uo sfemapts ysnd

‘OTEUBY B82q BATP AN4 Jo
[eset] FO Teqaenb set
5q4 UT puodsaz prnoys
ayeaiq ayy ‘sary FButuangy
asnl aq 4snu Teaun auy
‘HAVRE THAHM

. ‘aRepTeang. O49 squtod
qusUyoey4e eau sqzods
B4TuA ao sdqaz ‘'s¥utads
uayoaqg ‘uotyeazado aaay
‘sqanaqas quaq ‘agutqyunon
PUB BSTXB aua4 Joy Hoaug
TUVGED ONICHVI

“a

jS2uT pury
AUT8q prey-ae_ggze yoayo
éATaaay sqeaadg 4uBeTo
*MOOH HSVH1TN' DD

Ny éTTaus

pug quoty aeau aSepteasni POW
: ¥. 'BSal NOTSHOL

SSB Faq Ty] uaed# uy sautyT ao svage aqqtum ‘adja ‘squap
Toy qno pue apTsuy, yoaug
‘NIHS GOVIASAd

aug 03 S4utod yoeyy4e
BUQ TeaU SweIe SATU
'SdOOl GIFHLVaS

\

487eTasny of saonoseg
- ésj;ads 84

. jATTetoadsa
'S#utsgunom yoayg ‘sdta “SeonTd sseus yoeug
‘sqgods ayyym Joy Hoag

4} 084UT
‘CIMS TIVE

é'4°9 OOH YSON

J

4YSNTI pues

Atanas gfepd yontt 004 40N
pauaysey aupsed| ZATaaaz ajyeaadg
sand TIVE ‘STOULNOD PHOT

Btato SSHNUVH
— YEGTNOHS

oN . “Suraatz. aba. gutpanoame

SsSBTsazeqty eqy ‘OTA TA HBBLB, BATyM

. pu ‘aecos Suyasgeez eq, punosze
BROwIO ‘kepd “aapsssoxa toy yoang
i NOTHOINNOO Ba2TT Tavs TVLHOZTUOH

\ 7

Fras y-o ‘NTOAXO
‘OTGVH ‘| SUNTWAULSNI

WaAACNY SV GWYS
*MOLVATTE

. me oa. ftqmesss paey

1 sutor agen sjode a4 yum : euytd quaq To esoot (500g oe poe)

Aeqd aatssaoxe net cane ‘SgeTsraqry aug UT SPATE aATYyM Aol yssug
1H

*NOTDOUNNOD ONIM-AOVTESAT

my
FoYv71asNad


--- Page 34 ---
Check for proper position

and fitting of wings, elevator
and rudder. : ”
‘Check the angularity of the
axis (elevator and rudder).

. Wing vibration mist be ‘the,
e Same as on the manufacturer's
reporgs 77" © ,
For the Annual, checks, ‘the Loe a
. datum points ‘and other re. ee
: quirements are obtained from. mo :
_ the’ flight and service mannal. Oe

* AILERONS, FLAP:

“lL. Pull travel? No exceagiv
. Rips or nicks in surf

Fiberglass}
oh Ba Lea ”

co Ter skin

Nose joint

Ze

MAIN WING CONNECTORS

+ Sheck for hairline cracks
ct . : along the, Front portion of
; a. the spar fo ts, condition
DIVE BRAKES ; of the pins, “ball joints
and the main pin.

Full travel? Close well?
Play in joints?

WING:
Main apar- -e@a faultless?
‘No-cracks, ridges? .

ToT ag foe

HAIRLINE CRACKS at, the WING.ROOT EDGES Where they butt -
‘against the fuselage are usually not important if they."
ogeour in the filler material used here for a good areo~
dynamic fit, This resin~filler is not. very elastic and .
often develops cracks from the normal working of the
wings. The cracks do not grow when the Wings bend, and
the main spar ia’ not affected. If a bard landing make
the oracks looking more doubtful, remove the putty,and
inspect fhe spar. . :

HAIRLINE CRACKS at’ the LEADING EDGE stagnation point:
there jis the+same:probiem with the Dutty layer. The top
and “bottom shetis-of-the Libelle. wing are joined -to—
gether at. the.leading edge by two layers of glasscloth
inside, and the exteriar gap 1s filled‘with putty.
The leading edge - see figure —-tas as many layers of
glass as the rest-of the wing, but the reduced thick
ness (no balsa sandwich) makes the leading edge more
elastic, and ‘the putty is not able to follow.


--- Page 35 ---
|
i
\
i

{
}
|

ant iret enn neat ead teas Esety shiantinticetatmeweeaette bent

BASIC TECHWNIOUES

When it has happened... : .
Keep calm — evep light a cigarette if you must. Your case is probably ngt
as bad as many that came out fine. :

Go through. the checklist of the ship and establish exactly.what is ruined.

Then you must determine from,the debris what sort of glass material ~
weight, weave, and direction ~ went inte these parts. so

In most cases, you can do a little grinding to find this out; the layers
are built up,’ like plywoods. . “4
If. you are in dpubt, you can: :

i

a) Ask your manufactwer of the ship, |

b) Por all cases, add another layer of glass reinforcement when rebuilding
this‘area, ¢ .

c) Burn a piece of the debris. After the resin is burned out, the glass:
fibers remain ( if you didn't heat them too hot and melt the whole works
into’a lump), and then it's easy to tell fiber count.and direction of

layers .,

The golden rule says to always use one extra layer of glass than used before.

fhen you will have enough reserve for grinding and finishing, without §

fear of'damaging critical fibers. .
oc . . ‘ i

Lets look at thle similarities to and the diffey noe. between working with

fiberglass and with: wood: ann . '

+

In general, ond doesn't need to work s0 precisely with fiberglass pecause
the fiberglass ‘layera will squeeze together to a”amall degree. Usually no

’ pressure clamping is needed, which makes things: easier. Thereby one can

taken sevenal sessions with wood and glhe. ee
But Fibergiasa is more, exacting in corre :

aften accomplish things in one session with. fiberglass which. would: have

the: ogmponents 7

Both methdas ‘ate equally sensitive to, Er join ng areas,

Fiberglass, pefhaps ‘more than any other waterte!
stronger and run closer to the original. Use thi
yourself a bunch of steps-and sharp corners

wt :
SSS _
‘poor : >

If you have ‘not only holes, put also rips:in the skin, firat fix the rips;
then these repaired parts will guide you in.re-creating the right diape
for the rést of the area. a

Recall that ,.arlier we noted that the strongest bonds are formed when the
floleculea Cf the wet, unhardaned layers oan join together, So we like to
work "wet: upon wet" wherever possible. Also by this we spare ourselves a
Lot of grind Tf you can't work "wet upon wet", then the next bealt uo
course i : upon dry", 1.e,, Leying fresh resin and gless on some! which
has already nardened. Good clean sanded surfaces are necessary then.


--- Page 36 ---
30%

"Dry upon dry" is hardly ever done, for it places great demands on the

exact fitting of the parts, as in wood Glueing. Most of the time, we can

get by with one layer of wet material between two hardened parts, which .
equalises or levels any irregularities in the surface. If this is impossible,
due to a precision fit, then we must consider: the highest strength is .
‘obtained by glueing two hardened fiberglass parts together with pure resin.
But only with a very good fit!. Pockets of the very brittle resin will |
disturb the strength of the connection. Where the exact glued surfaces are
‘dubious, we can use a resin mixture "filled" with various kind of small
particles. . . .

Filler - Tf one must £111 in uneven spots or thick layers with resin, one must
material thicken the resin so that it doesn't drip or run. Usually one uses
. powdery fillers, to make the mixture thick, like putty, and also because
cur resin tends to be brittle. For our purposes the beat are:

Aerosil — makes the resin stiff, go it won't drip. But the hardened
mixture is brittle like pure resin.

Cotton fibers — the mixture is not too, hard ‘and is easy to grind.
We use a mixture of aerosil and cotton fibers when we want a filled
resin which should sustain a lot of pressure but must remain
flexible as wéll. .

Glass dust yields a: very hard, strong mixture, which one should
-not use on top of wet-resin~fiberglasa. Also this mixture is rela—
tively dense. :
Microballoons is excellent for making a-very light putty for thick
layers, It grinds well, but it is forbidden as an-adhesive for
joints. Its strength is not the beat,

The normal microballoon material is brown (Phenol resin).

it has also-such in white, but this is very hard to obtain,

if you wish isuch from plastic. There is also white naterial
made from littel glass bAlls, but the mixture of them is very
heavy, and hard to abrasive.

Separating Suppose that you had made a fiberglass part ina special mold, or
material you had used the origin surface of your sailiplane as a mold for a spare
: part, and then after the resin had herdened,:you couldn't pry, dig, or bl
the part loose from the mold. That would be irritating. . .

Evidently the molds should be suitable isolated. Where’ thin plastic sheet
won't do because tha, curvature, then one waxes "the mold and more often,
rougher it is. . * " ;

There are two main groupa of parting agents: Water: olutions of certain a
thetics, and wax solutions. The water solutions’ part wall, but the dry lg
retarded and the surfaces don't get so smooth.. Therefore we mostly use th
wax solutions. Most auppliers of resins alao have parti agents -availabl
The waxy solutions are brushed or.mopped on;: they-dry: = few minutes,

In simple litt}, cases you can use floor-wax. -

Any surface expusea to a parting agent mustbesoarefully cleaned before
puts resin or laquer on it. Even slight traces. of parting agent in the.
Sanding dust on the surface will ruin a good.bend. « ao :


--- Page 37 ---
30

Seriovglv warned should be before. -any substance — Separators or
polishes ~ which contain silicone. This penetrates. very deep
into the FRP and cannot be removed. On this spots it is hardly
impossible to set a reliable repair.

contact
no cont:

The following material stick to fiberglass— resin:

Metal, wood, cloth, paper, rubber, concrete,’ clean glass, and some fiberbéards [7 2)
The following material do NOT stick;

Polyethylene, Teflon, polyvinyl chloride (PYG), Cellophane, polyamid (Nylon),
shiny phenolica, and probably polystyrene. And also linoleum and all fasty
greasy, or waxy stuffs, including silicones. i

For the materials with a question-mark the behaviour is not clear.

Some people may end lamentable - because things which go into rooms
or compartments very good in form of clothwith resin, may perhaps
not to go apart in stadium of hardness...

Ball and roller bearings, and other link joints and rods must be well. protected
against the dangers of resin running into them, especially when the parta are

heated and the resin becomes liquid. litre water You neven beable to. glean oe
epoxy out of ‘bearings ! aid foe wba teeth Tt te

tected with primer paint; otherwise the hardener attacks” “then Bad ‘rust puitds

upe- : . won ated ptt

If you wish to use some pressure while the resin is hardening, there are two
reasons why the vressure should not ha too strong: firstly, you won't be sure
of the shape ibecause the fiberglass will wander, and secondly, “the repaired
pieces shouldhseethe same thickness as the old to. which they: join, for althcugh
thinner, highly pressed sections have a higher glass fiber density, they also
bend much | easier.

During manufacturing, and also in bigger repair works, the pressure vacwun
by vacuum is usual. Hach LTB .owned a vacuum pump. In adventurous

cases of the begin of PRP sometimes aggregats of milking machines

were used, Today are available special machines. ~~ One can, in

rare cases, turn around a normal compressor.

A repair which was vacuum- pressed is more soft to even than a
spot as described in page300. And because the pressure oftthe
vac cannot be more than 1 atue, there is no chance to displace
the whole matter.

ow is to do this in practice?

The trick is less to bring the spot really sealed, but to
suck out as many air as possible. One should use for this no
narrow valves, and not too little thbes.


--- Page 38 ---
303 .
A repair prepaired for vacuum pressure looks like this:
(the layers are listened in the sequence of putting-on)

Crna ca

aT a LO ares

AERTS
a 73 RE

sandwich shell
repair spot og
tear off cloth if available | la
foil which have little holes (woved with nails)

air cloth (jute, fleece )-———____->______-

[ 5 vacuum foil, sealed around with tapes

are sealed with bathroom sealing

“

OF wwe

7 vite Wrinkles at the tubes

gf it is to be apprehend that a lot of dust will be in the
pump air, then defend your tube end with a filter of cloth.

Tf you have not Many experience in vacuum technique, it may

be worthwile to make a test in dry before using the resin, _
The vacuum is perfect if the Little wrinkles which bulid up

in the vacuum foil cannot be pulled up by hand, at no spot!

Only really big holes in the foil you will hear to spit.

The finer the whistle the more little the hole (and that

means the more bad to find).

Tt is bad that all sharp spots, little resin needles etc. need
eften some time for to drill themselves through our carefully
Sealed foil...

The vacu foil should so Loose bepositioned that it will not
be separated from the borders when the vacuum is pulling on.

A little before we have read something about "tear off cloth:
an invention which elaminates the burdensome abrasive after
gluing. One put it as the last layer on the repair spot. after
hardening it is simple removed — and ready is the abrasive!

when one: has ‘painfully dearned to discriminate between ‘places where spmething
should be cemented and places where in no case should.there be cement:— the
one to be catefully prepared for the resin,. the Other te bear parting, agent
to reject the glue, and all this with the greatest economy of means —, then
it will seem ‘like sport, to juggle these two possibilities, .. . 7

ton


--- Page 39 ---
TOOLS

.In addition to-the usual tools of an aircraft shop, the following are
especially recommanded for fiberglass work:

Clean vessels for resin, hardener, and mixing °

Brushes with small bristles, and one big brush .

Sharp scissors

Sandpaper of varous grits

Abrasive baper 200, 300, 400, and 600 grits; d000., 4500

Sharp chisel
A keyhole saw, a hacksaw blade with one end taped to make a handle

Files, nalf-round, coarse

_Sanding block to hold sandpaper while using it

Sanding lath: the working side of this must be exactly even!
Rule: if you equalize a wing surface,~the longer the sanding-
lath the better the quality of the surface of your wing.

For wet abraSive paper the lath should be in minimum as long
as 2 blades of abrasive paper.

Vinyl (PvG) Plastic electrical tape,
Clear cellophane tapes, old newspapers,

Plastic sheeting, polyethylene

Good special roughing fool: a piece ofa, haekgan age: | Sbbdied..on, a .
handle from fiberglass,or wood, or metal :

an oid, bended pushrod which will be prepared on one end for
insert a little brush. With this one can reach in to a fuselage
f.i. very. deep for resin worke.

Parting agents for epoxies. In emergency, try paste wax or ‘clear’ shoe
polish, also a candle, However, never use waxes containing aiiicones

because one can never remove traces of them from the work, and silicones
Will prevent adhesion of resin or laquer.

Solvents: Acetone or MEK (methyl—ethyl-ketone), daquer thinners, petroleum
solvents, to clean the tools and remove traces of parting agents. Don't
_ get them on the canopy!

A small hand grinder makes the work easier,

A disc sander with a 90° acapter is extremely-useful for many works, but
untrained peoplé should use only small ones, — providing the danger of
cutting holes ‘very quickly!

These tool: iS veally a little dust slinger - but no other
tool is so multipurpose in our handicraft.

In the most cases these tools are delivered with hard grind
disks. These are unsuitable for us. The best are these white

elastic polyamide disks.

Grinding wheel for sharpening tools - fiberglass dulls them faster than
wood! :

Balance or scale which is accurate to about one gram (0,05 ounce)
~ a mail scale is not close enough in the most cases

aa,

30

/


--- Page 40 ---
HOO

FTRERGLASS~— BALSA— SANDWICH SKIN?

(Libelle and Bs — Wings, Elevator, Rudder)

To these members we have a layer of balsa wood between two layers of
fiberglass, * ,

There are ‘two; kinds of damage: . we :
a) Only the outer skin and balsa is damaged, and the inner skin .isrsound;

b) The damage: goes through all three layers.

i

SS 2 layers of fiberglass a
wu Stiitzstoff balsa wont
io dayer. inner skin ~~~" S&S

course simpler, go let's begin with its.:° 7077
aE .

ae F*B
OS

Grind off the afflicted area
“with 40 - 60 grit sandpaper, until.
the, paint is removed from the outer
skin and the structure of the glass. -
cloth is visible about 6 mm (1/4 in.)
around the rim of the hole.

Fill the hole in’the balsa with epoxy
putty which ig made from normal epoxy
mixed with'microballoon, cotton floc,
sawdust, dr even flour.

Let it hataen!


--- Page 41 ---
Grind off the excess resin flush with the
sound balsa ae :

. Remove part of the. outer skin so that the
glass ig exposed for about 20 mm (0.8 in.)

around the rim, The exposed glass should be

ground tapered so that it goes from zero to .

full thickness in the 20 mm, Note that it will

be aasy to unwittingly carve deep holes iu

the balsa while attacking harder stuff.'

Do not touch area with (greasy) fingers!

Remove dust with clean brush.

Cut some glass cloth patches to cover the
area ~- use the same kind and lay as original in
in that area (Exception: On wing skins, instead’
of 2 layers 92145, use 3 layers 92110: The
92145 weave can't be blended too well).
Thoroughly wet the patches and the area with

freshly mixed epoxy..and lay them in place.
Saturate all with epoxy. co .

hiavtilm.of polyethylene,
md work “dhe air -bubbles
Be-dareiuk not to shift the

: fone ve ek 4

When epoxy is surely hard, pull off the
film' end proceed ta grind the area to shape,
starting with coarse paper aud finishing with
200 or aven 400 grit; wet. Keep greasy fingers
aff. Epoxy putty can ‘be used to fill tiny
holes. :

4o


--- Page 42 ---
how

Now we consider case b), the awful ‘hole through both the inner and outer
skins. It will be necessary to rebuild the inner. skin first.

Suppose that one can't reach the area from behind, and that the hole ip

the inner’skin is small. .

Prepare the hole as shown in
picture b 2. fhe grain of the, - -
new balsa piece must run

parallel with: the original!

bye
The inner suyfaces of the support
material are ‘covered thoroughly
with époxy, mixture .

Then gover the bottom of the balsa >
piece with: glass cloth and saturate ~

it with epoxy . . g
: i . ;

So it looks if the support material is balwa.

Tf we have foam, it has no fiber direction, certainlx. We have
only to watch that the material is shafted around with 20 mm,
Tubus or Hexcel will not be shafted but insert simple stump
and the edges will be glued with microballoon.

5

with epoxy. and insert the fitted
part. Apply [ight pressure with
weights or} sand bags. .

Cover the prepared area of the shell’: =

The nextisteps follow as explained
in piatune: 5 ‘and following.

Tha aupport matarial, balsa or foam, should ba replaced avery time ‘in the
described “kind, It might be easy to make a foam’ support material in a
round shape, -but it will be very hard to fit it precisely, . :
But the glasq cloth should be cut with round corners,


--- Page 43 ---
This method in 2 steps will deliver the most qualitative result.
If you have no time for a long work, it is also possible to
repair the whole thing in one step: cover the support material
with a glass piece which will reach ca 20 mm over the PRP materi-
al of the surface layer. For this the foam must be fit very well,
not too high. Then continue like picture a 6.

For larger damage: prepare as shown in picture
o 2, but the weaving must cover the slanted .

surfaces and extend beyond those slanted aur—
faces. These "ears" lie on the spliced’ eige

of the outer FRP layer.

From there follow as shown in picture 6.

For holes big enough to admit a couple, of fingers,
or where the inner skin hangs down and flops. around
most disconcertedly, one must build a Light platform
under the inner skin to hold it in place while new’
fabric is glued to it. .

ot ara Dress the inside surface of the inner
xo " skin to a clean, tapered surface, as
7 NR. shown in picture c 2. Gloves will

protect the hands from sharp edges!.-

Cut out a platform piece of foam

or balsa or other light material

big enough to overlap the hole {
by abhut 50 mm (2 in.) all around. .
Sand off its top surface so that
it is a fairly good fit to’ the
ground surface of the inner skin.
Then secure with wires or strings
against the shéll.’The inserted
part must’f£i¢ shell contour ex-
actly. without distorting the

contour, | .° . . -

(OB

Practice with a-dzy-run!

We cover the top side of thia in-
' gerted piece with epoxy and glaas_
= cloth, so that it overlaps the '
“aplice of the inner FRP layer.
After saturating exactly we tighten
-the wires or strings against the
shell, and let it harden. a

The reestablished’ inher layer .is ndw
‘sanded off and one “can lay in a piece
' of balsa or foam and proceed as “shown " ‘
in picture b 2 ~ 4°and continued as in
picture 5, °

z This support platform remains forever

' a inside and we must insure that it re-
mains there in fact, and also does not
. interfere with any steering mechanism.

Jn all cases where you are not
completely sure to obtain a
precise junction of the ianer
Vovers. wou nit under the


--- Page 44 ---
Ook

bended
parts

roving
ropes

Sometime.: we will not come to a result, f.i. if the damage is
positioned in the bended area of the nose. Then we should pre-
pare a replace part, We stretch a foil in the neighbourship of
the damage over the bended area, put on this a piece of inner
layer FRP, good with wet resin, and on this a piece of foam.
This will bé pressed with tapes, tear off cloth or vacuum on
the bended spot. Let harden. Jf you have tear off cloth, then
this is the first layer before.. the inner FRP, so we have not
to grind.

For this we have here the method "dry onto dryt, it is neces-
sary to glue in this replacement part with cotton fiber mix-
ture. :

Working with roving ropes

To this it is coming very easy. Example: a guide of a lever for
airbrakes or flaps isuyebbhligg; a landing gear cover is rein-
forced with rovings ; the back rest of the ASK 21 is broken in
top: etc. etc.

Certainly it is impossible for you to constate how many rovigs
per rope and how many ropes are placed in the mentioned position,
you can only, estimate regarding the thickness of the layer.

You can produce a roving rope as following:

cut some pieces of rovings, perhaps a meter or so. Then they are
impregnated with resin. work f.i, on an old newspaper (also foil
is possible, but I personally prefer paper beacause it is to look
where you have put resin, and also the paper absorbe the resin a
little. the work grews less smeary than with foil).

The slipp- off of the most resin you can do in the simpelst matter
with the fingers. More domfortable:

take’ a piece of tube 6 x 1 mm. This has a caliber of 4 mn. Therein
6 rovings can be slipped off. This results a proportion fiber/
resin of nearly 50%. A tube 10 x 1 has. a caliber of 8 mm; can
take 25 rovings for nearly equal proportion.

Certainly you should observe that the running of the rovings into
the tube is prepared very soft, so the tube begins like a venturi
tube. Profis put the tube into a turned mouth of steel, or alumin.

The area which you like to strenghten will be roughen, prepared
with resin, the ropes positioned fine shafted and the layer
covered always with glass cloth, otherwise the rovings may can
crack under Load. a

In case you like to repair a broken roving rope the shaft length
must have a proportion of 1: 4o.

The stop position of the landing gear lever may be weaked in
some planes by time. In all PRP guides we can renew this with
a roving rope positioned against the lever (see picture).

If this is not passible screw or rivet a piece of polyamide
against the Lever.

--- Page 45 ---
. 4OS

result after
hardening

pre-fabricated
nose part

(weight }

taper

stop of jcloth layer 4
landing gear lever - - oe

tube 6¥/

simple apparatus for
fabricate roving ropes


--- Page 46 ---
Loe

Repair of an all- fiberglass fuselage

(Libelle, Sato, others }

fn contrast ‘to ‘the wing a fuselage
shell consists only of fiberglass.
this design provides spring flexibility.

Tn case ofa smaller damage do nothing
but splice around the area, approxi- ve]
mitaly 2 - 1.5 inches (20 —- 30 mm). . Pa
ve thé kind and direction of the . .
cioth and replace accordingly. Doe :
fivS layer of glass cloth is’ the .
£, und! each repeated layer should
be 7 - 10 mm (1/2 in.) smaller in cir—
cuttfecance. tet it, harden, sand it,
paint it. . f .

Rips in che shell or built-in parts
are tu begtdund away (taper) on each
side for a.distance equal to the
Length of,the irip, but at most about
50 mm (2 in.) fon each.side of the nip;
and also at each end. Lay dn resin’
und properly driented glass cloth.
after thid is'hard, grind off the in- .-
side surface of the rip and lay ou:
, a sigle layer ‘of fabric inside, as’
shown im the picture. Observe the
kind und direction of the glass cloth
and replace! accordingly! ° ,

Por larger damages it is difficult to

establish the :contour without a support,
Example 1: Pit a piece of foam, “fromthe .
inaide, so that if completely covers «the open
area and Secure it with brace or other support

Remove the foam and splice the shell in
4 normal manner, cover the foam with a
foil and ifserpt it. Rebuild the shell
as described barlier.

You can also Work without the foil as
dong as the fpam will not react to’ the
epoxy: (Teet A small piece!) Styrofoam
has proven, ta work well. a

Bat certainly, this manner requires! more
eftort tocvclean the pate.

And certainly you have the possibility to
fabricate on a spot in the neighbourship
& replacement part. (page 407)


--- Page 47 ---
new outer layers

blind rivets

4Or

.Example 2: You make a-mold on the out—
aside. This is not too hard to make

First wax the opposite symetrical side
af the airplane perfectly (hoping this
area was not damaged too!), lay on one
layer of saturated glass cloth of 300
or 400 weight (12 oz./sq yd), letiit
harden and sand it as desired without
removing from the plane's contour!

Then, after removing, bend it inside—
out, Like an old hat. Now the nicely
ground surface, which used ta be con~—
vex, bas become concave. It can be:'
waxed and used as a mold, ~

After preparing the damaged area

as learned earlier under: “little

holes", wax the new mold and lay in

the observed glass cloth. After ,

saturating it with resin, stick the
whole affair onto the damaged area’ Ls
in the right place. Hold it there
very lightly, say with sticky tape.
Heavy pressure will distort the
shell contour or remove the wet
fiberglass.

With small, curvaceous surfaces one
may use modeling clay. or typewriter '
oleaner: or even Plaster of Paris to
form a mold (but: do not nee. silicones!)
Remember that some of these.molding |
materials may. contain grease which |
ruins the epoxybond.-So0 after remo—
ving the molding‘ ‘material; .clean the
rebuilt‘ area’well with hot, soaby
water -and roughen” it well after drying
if you need, to. work with resin

on this ‘area.

Whenever it is possible, try to put
one layer ou -the'iuside for safdty
. Peasons. Any ‘separating: material .
should be removed- before inserting.
the inner Layer. Wash with acetone : a
and sand it.

A HOLE

you can often not repair even enough
with the wet PRP layers. .
Then you prepare on a spot of the
fuselage which seems adequate of
the hole contour a fiberglass.
adapter of 2 to 3 layers,
fit it with the good overlapped
borders to the repair spot and glue
- it from inside, very well roughed,
te cover the hole. Glue with cotton
filled resin.
If you fix it with some little
blind rivets, you can work without
an interruption with the onvter

Ly FRP layers.


--- Page 48 ---
Hos

Cc

D

“ pver this lay a single Tayer of cloth
‘and
it ¢
8 ‘d° rib.
mag id vi

‘unddt light pressure in the. right

‘ posix this first in the usual way .

WHEN A BULKHEAD TS DAMAGED:

Small places can be patched directly
bn the rib. Naturally one sands the
spot as‘usual. One who is wise also
patchés‘ little dents and bends, tou.

When a large portion of the rib is
torn.up; one will have to make a mold.
One caniform a rib core out of a foam
Plastic, glue it into the skin, and
day over it the necessary layers of
glass:cloth and toving, impregnated _t
with ‘regin, . .

or one Gan use an undamaged rib as
@ pattern. lay a piece of thin poly . J Sf,
‘ethylen® film over the good rib, and ; nn 8 © Se

: ; Ore —
Tye
; o pulkbesd er,
If the prepared base doesn't. curve

: SST wet
quitg right, saw some notehes in it —— : > :

so that!it will bend under light pres— : QC . \
sure Here one is forced to repair the .
rib in two steps. First, glue on

(epox 13 just one layer of cloth over
the’ deformed base’ and let it' harden -:

esin, After it hardens, one uses
"ai base for.re-creating the da—

f

shape. pecond , ou this now perfect’
pattern, (naturally after ‘sanding!):
glie on the roving and: outer fabric
dayers.i Certainly, it is allowed to
put. the, roving ou the peak of the
ving! between the first and second
layer. ° u

Damage TRAILING. EDGES ON -ATLERONS, Soe
vl GR REaps: coe, Te

If offly a short length ta split open, 1% often auffices
to “ery ithe two halves apart a little bit’ and ‘sqtieeze .
someveyoxy into the split.; The two sides should then
be squgezed. together equally, as by spring clathespins
or ‘film clips. a

oe . 1
Howevex , if a piece of the edge has been hacked out,
them yqu need. to build it uy -again with resin and cloth.
Sant’ off the paint until tha gless fibers are visible, :
jay, inj2 layers of 90070 fine cloth and resin in “the pro- -
per way, and overlapping. Cover two straight pieces of
wood with foil and clamp them to the upper and lower, tte

. subfacd in a way that they line up with the trailing :
‘edge. Prevent any Sliding, especially ou large parts, 4

Ifj-the! balsa haa been damaged, then naturally you nead .

Be-careful not to add too much mass to the trailing
edges, lest you upset the mass balance for flutter.
:


--- Page 49 ---
TORN-OUT END RIBS

on Flaps or Ridders.

If the rib is torn. out clean, sand all

around it first. Then split the rudder

on the trailing edge and even coat the

vib with thickened epoxy (aerosil-and

cotton flakes) and ram it back into

position. Clamp it with tape-covered

wood pieces: This freshly glued ‘part

has to be installed in its position

so, the bearings will line up again.

Uaually, hawever, the rib is not,torn ont.

so gently, and a piece of the end: rib or

skin is damaged or distorted. The, diffi-

culty here is that the parts are built in
‘female molds, which you don't happen to :
have handy. In spite of this the repair [o>
must match the original contour 4nd the .
original strength must be regained; There~

fore you'll ‘have to make some kind; of a

mold, either by: i

a) bending some smooth sheet metal exactl
to the right contour, or . .
b) using the corresponding undamaged mem—
ber on the. other wing aa'a pattern, for a
mold (Ailerous, flaps, and elevator of tHe
Libelle have’ symmetrical. profiles!), ‘or

2) Making an exact duplicate ofthe part,
in softwood, cover it with 1 layer of

glass cloth, sand it and fill it -#ith
putty, and make a female mold from this.

As in other aircraft repair, one must
first obtain a good rib, either by repair
or by purchase. . an “Lo ,
Then, with the aid of-the moid prepared
by one of the above methods, one can set
in the rib and fasten'the skin to it as
described above. : .

“Please note that in the neighborhood of
all end riba in the Libelle and'BS 1,
the balsa on the sandwich tapers off to
zero, somewhat in from the rib, and the
balsa ia not called upon to carry any
load in these places. See figure,


--- Page 50 ---
iio

The feet of the. bolts
os look like this

Here under the putty sit hinges
and screws (fuselage side);
or rivets (door side).

IF AN ASSEMBLY PIN ON TRE WING ROOT

IS BROKEN OFF:

Relax. It's not like breaking a legy
The little pins have nothing to do -
with the stress portion of the wing.,
In fact, their strength is purposely
limited to prevent damages by enthusi-
agtic but misguided assemblers.

Grind away the remuants where the pin

_ sat, until -there's no bump-left. Then

lay 2 layers of glass cloth on the ‘spot,
and place'a new pin on the spot. Gut
out 4 circular patches: of glass cloth,:
The patches should'bhave different ~- .
sizes, about 50 - 65, mm

Poke 4 hole in the :center of each patch:
using something smooth so that no ‘
fibers are cut (perhapa d'acissor’s tip;
Slip it over the head’ of the bolt so
that they cover. its-¥eet. Orient the
fabric so that the fibers crisscross,
saturate all with resin, and let harden,

i

LANDING GRAR DOORS:

Damaged doors are disassembled by..,
cleaning off the area of the hinges
and removing the screws. If the hinge
is damaged, it can be replaced with
Similar brass hinges...

The fiberglass doors are repaired

“ag is", If rovings are torn, prdaceed
as with "Porn—-out Fittings", and‘use
new rovings with’ splices about 50 -— 60
mi. (2 ~ 2.5 in.)long.

Badly damaged doors are usually repldaceu
hecause it's too demanding to try to
re-create their exact contours,

added A basic remark to the installing of added equipment parts:

equipment 4. each of these nice added parts costa weight. Very fast in

this kind you can collect —

this reduce the limit of payload. -

some kes of weight, and

2, The plane is licensed based an its type certificate.
Going away from this Line can interrupt the traffic license
of the plane, with all consequences (insurance cover!) This

is valid also for added equipment,

Or the elimination of

parts which are listend in the type designs.

If you find such a change very important you can apply for 4
"ehange on the piece" by the. government. The for this necessary
paperwork know the manufacturer or the LBA.


--- Page 51 ---
A

4 LAA

Attachment Point Reinforcement.

Tf you have to attach something

on the shell, the same rules apply
as in wood construe tion. The area
must be. strengthened before cutting
any holes or inserting screws.

fo accomplish this, rougheo the
place and put some layers of
glass onto the area, each larger

+ than the: preceeding layer, and’ also
changing the directiod of the weave.
fhe «sjttengthening shall be in a
vealigtip relation to the. weight it
must’-carpy, A 1/8 inch diameter
tubing dbes' not need as much as an
-instrumeht weighing two pounds.
In ddubt! you make some tests an a
geparate! piece of Wood. or fiber—
glass,

For Léapp, hooks, sockets, tubes:
Sgnditthe; area, wrap the part with
glass ‘icloth around the tube and

another layer iapping over to the
skin, and let harden in ‘position.

Greater Btrength ig achieved by
wrapping, the part with soaked strands
of royings. Spread the end out over
the ‘shell and Secure it with an addi~
ioe ‘layer of clath..

You #4n “also build a
remayva Te attach peint:

4 Firgtredver the sheLl with foil a
rdeeed as deseribed ahove.
hardening ' remove the bushing
incliding all the ‘glass.

2 Cover tle back side of this attach=
ment ldte with foil and drill tha
fecessany holes fof the connection.
bolts: through the plate and foil,

3 Sand’ thd area-where the attach. point
should We located and cover it with
the niécdssary ‘layers of glasg cloth.

nithe hexegons of the qecessary
: with a file, the rougher the
bet er. ‘Protect the eorews than against
rusk," -by primer or by gina on cadmium
plating: Cover shank and thread of tha
senewa with grease, but the head must
Femain dlean.
& App 2ito 3 layers of glass onto the
pre irdd backside of the attachment
plate, dlear the holes of weaving and
push thé screws through so that the
heada’, come to rest on the wet glass.

6 Put resin-wetted glass fuagles around
screw heads

fpress the so prepared attachment plate
against the glass spot in the plane and
fix it with any suitable tool.

Por a conncetion between the plane and
ae Ph ee, a i: i,


--- Page 52 ---
500

The Surface;

After vepairs the equalize of the spot with putty is necessary.
Rughen the spot well without injure the FRP. The structure of
the upper glass layer should be not hurt. Abrasive paper 80 -

100. :

Than you apply a white polyester putty with the japanese
spatula. The plainer the putty area the lower the work to
erind. It may be remunerative to donate a boddle beer to a
friendly painter so that he will bring on the putty area -
because he is able to do this in minutes and he reach a
perfectly even area - instead the most laymen can only set
relatively equal heaps .

Sometimes you need to apply the putty 2 to 3 times.Between
the steps it needs to grind again. By time you feel a nearly
even area which has no more differences to the environment.

_f The putty area is to grind a little deeper than the un-
treated area so that you have room for the later laquer.
But in practice exactly the repairspot is the highest!
Here hels only a wide spread-out of Schw. for -to
make invisible the buckle.

If you have to fill out a relatively little spot ina
Schwabbellack surface, you can avoid somtimes a big action

if you wait until the Schw. reaches nearly its polymeri-

zation point. Then he gets very thick, and you can fill

more mi. Qr you add some Aerosil (page 301). Then the .
spot gets perhaps not so shiny, but you have no colour difference
to the environment - and save a lot of work.

in case of synthetic laquer surfaces (page 604) comes
after the putty a thick filler, painted or sprayed, then
a fine filler whichis to grind fine and wet, and then the
laquer


--- Page 53 ---
We know two methods to colour a sailplane;:
a) on the beginning, b) on the end of its manufacturing.

The painting of the surface on the beginning, as the first step
into the mold, we call "gelcoat" method. In all the first
native time of the plastic plane one has known only the
"Schwabbellack"; later there were developped special gelcoat
resins. They-are specially designed to get no "noses" on
vertical surfaces.

For the final iaquer method you know the steps from a tar;
one useg also often the same laquers. So every clever
craftsman for car~ spraying can help and advise you.

it is clear that you should handle each kind of surface
in its special manner. For this it is necessary to ask
the sailplane manufacturer for the kind of surface before
begimning every surface work.

Gelcoat resin is in the most cases a ' really thick layer; .
it is not to apprehend that you will erind "through" if

you use a reasonable corn of sandpaper. But sometimes it

is not so freindly to polish. If you have to apply some

material it is necessary to grind the spot exactly.

Caution is to be observe in the area of noses and other

areas whre it is possible that we have glue gaps from
manufacturing; there may be refitted and you may find

thinner spots.

Gelcoat material is . harder than Schwabbellack.

' Polyester- Schwabbellack ist also painted first into

the negative mold, but it is more fluid and for this it
can. run from vertical walls so that the surface is not
50 equal than’ gelcoat. Also in former times (GLASFLUGEL)
vne were avaricious with the weight of a plane so that
we have often some trouble with a very thin layer of
Schwabbellack.

Also the laying-on with a brush as it was done in former times
of plastic planes that the white surface is not very even. This
uneveness is followed by the first cloth layer. In such cases
you should not have the ambition to remove each white Little
spot from the surface if you like to put a new gelcoat on this,
In this case you would hurt on many places the first glass
layer | -
\ py white surface + j

+ wetbanguamnone ao an Sliding level

zy"

3. sloth :

Before beginning with the work in Polyester, you should
regard the part intensively in a slanting coming sunlight;
then it is to see if there are thin areas. Then you have
to decide: if you grind a repaired area you will neces-
sary also grind the environment, and if this is thin from
the first, you will risk there dark spots, so that you
have to apply there new material ... and so on until


--- Page 54 ---
502,

lay on

reaction
spot

sliding

If you have decided for "apply" — this is no question for repair
spots - then you leok good over the area and draw a pencil line aroun
the area you will paint. This is grinded with abrasive paper 120,
if you feel that the whole area has not so thick material, you
take finer, 220 or 400. Never paint wider than the grinded area,
this will result borders.

After this you paint the Schw. not too thin, grinding is rela-
tively facile, also thin layers. may harden slower and often not
correctly.

Immediately after the laquer has polymerizated you can apply
the next layer, if you have to paint vertical spots - so that

you can reach also here a good thick surface. :

Never paint over the pencil line or other uncleaned spots -— they
will come as dark spots after erinding.

During its reaction the Schw. is, fora very short time, really
thick as putty so that you are able to apply it in this moment
in millimeters thickness ~ if you have an uneven area too little
for putty work. :

Tf the Schw. is harden good and ready - you can help with a
heating fan, but not so long. it is wet! — than you grind.

Only if you have to remove bigshubbles than you take 120 paper,
and only for the hubbles. Otherwise take no coarser than 360
to 400. This -needs more time;-but in other cases it may be
poasible that you can't remove the scrapes.

You use wet sanding paper, and span it over a good even piece of
balsawood or other wood which is not too hard. For the wing

the woad piece may be the longer the better. You please work
never in direction-of the wood's length, always rectangular

or diagonal. Otherwise you fabricate channels.

This first grinding step decides over the quality of your
surface; for this you colour the surface with a mixture of

very little colouv laquer and a lot of thinner - only so

that you have a gleam of colour.

If you grind then with the even wood, you will note that on (
the higher places the surface get white and on the lower the ;
coloured spots rest. So you have a check if you have grinded

the whole area correctly.

If you see a dark shadow while on other areas still the

colour rest unremoved, than you repeat the method of pain-

ting : line with pencil around the deep area, sanding and

filling out with Schwabbellack, really thick.

After this you paint another time, thinner, also’
over the dark shadow — area.

This is to hear a little complicate, and of course it can

be throughout a time- eating procedure, guided by your
pretensions. Not without reason such planes are more
expensive than such with a thick surface layer, but they are
certainly lighter than them.


--- Page 55 ---
fine
finish

spray

if the progress of the work cames on the spot that you have
the feeling to have no more shadows or spots with colour -
and..also the feeling with your hand notes no more uneven
spots ~ than you can dry the whole thing and regard it in
Slanting coming light. The surface than has already a light
shiny looking, and you will see very good eventual scrapes
or other mistakes,

If you are satified totally with the 400 wet abrasion, you
take the 600 and 800 paper. You can take a softer wood for
it -(never.you sand without an even base)-Now no more
material will be removed, only the channels of the former
paper will be slided. The direction of sliding is now im-
portant: the wings in direction of flight, also the fuse~-
lage, only the ailerons can be done in length because their
chord is too little.

The last step is a slide with the oldest, used-up fine
800 paper which brings only the last scrapes aboard.

Then comes the fine work with 1000 and the grey 1500 paper.

The dried surface has now a fine shiny look. We polish it
with a good car polish. Ndét..d0 experienced persons should
not use a polish disk (angle:‘polisher): if the surface
gets too warm on any spot thé the structure of the @lass
come to see and all the work. was for nothing.

If you have obstinated dark areas, there will help only

a radical procedure: you should grind this spat deeper
than the area around - without injuring the FRP! - and
spread out your Schwabbellack over a-good area around.
Otherwise you will have on the critical spot a buckle

for all time.

So complicate the whole thing seems - one can nearly do not
really mistakes. If the dark shadow comes you will see.
For this also laymen may try to help theirselves in
following the described method.

Because Schwabbellack gets yellow a little after long
time, it will be not to avoid sometimes to get"different
colours of white"(as we say) But this means not a lack
in straightness for the surface, which is the important

point,
The procedure with gelcoat is similar to Schw.

For some Schw. there are thinner or thinned hardener which allow
to apply them with the spraygun. Tf you have larger areas you
should prefer this. You can do it in a normal workroom which are
prepared against dust by wetting the floor and covering ithe
environment of the repair area.

So

ad


--- Page 56 ---
504.

build up
steps

spray

Synthetical laquer (polyurethane, Acrylic ete.)

Gontrary to Schwabbellack this is a really laquer, with
characteristical thin-layer. The working method for this
is basically different. The laquer should be sprayed with
4 gun, and it needsa dusty- free working room (cabin).

ft is more elastic and in spite more harder than
Schw. and rest white for years.

The method - let us regard the SALTO — is the sane then
on a car; first putty, than filler, than laquer. Because
the laquer layer is thin you will come through easy when
sliding, and you will note this not so fast because the
underground is white.

The first putty, normally a sprayed one, will be slided
with 80 paper. It delivers the straighthness of surface.
The fine filler is to slide with wet 400 paper. It is soft
and to slide fastly. after this workstep the part should
not have heavy dark spots.

Repair spots’ are to spray with a gun and with disappearing

borders - not. as §chw. with hard contours as from = brush.

They will be prepared good with 600 paper. The sprayed area
should be on end before the#end. of sliding. .

To slide the ready work you will do after full hardening,
otherwise you get Scrapes. This harding procedure will

@0 over days and weeks because we have not the possibility
to heat as on a car.

How big the characteristic "orange surface" of spraying will
be depends on the quality of material and sprayer.

If it is necessary te slide then you use no coarser than
600 paper, better finer, because channels are very hard
bo remove. Better to work a little longer with fine paper
as to have the angry after using toscoarse one,

Have you slided the sprayed part with 600 you should dry and
look for the success. If you are content you take the old 800
or 1000 used-up paper and slide the whole area at once.
After this there should not be to see channels.

Then you polish preferable by hand. Every good polisher is
to use if you know it from your car ~ this laquer is a

car laquer. With patience you can reach on your bird a
diamond-— like brigthness which makes pleasure for long time
in fact of its better hardness.


--- Page 57 ---
600

SALTO and others; ;
1. Elastic Sealing:

elastic If the sealing of the SALTO canopy is no more o.k., -— this can be

frame extended if you protect the sealing on the outside with a white
plastic tape —- than you should replace it by another system; for
this you need some skill, but the result is a lot better in its
aerodynamic effect .

First remove the old sealing, clean the frame and rough
it a little. Before working you should protect the
plexiglass by a plastic tape on the outsi'de directly
over the sealing. Added to this-use another tape over
the first which overlapps the first some mms.

If you set the canopy on the fuselage you will note
a gap between canopy and fuselage. This is the area
for the damping element. We create it as follows;

pret in supermarkets you can buy silikone sealing paste,
used normally for bath ceramics. We need 2 tubes of
it, also the cartridge for to apply it, a roll of
foam sealing for windows, ca 5 mm wide, a straight
frames spatula from plastic, and a very weak base for the
. canopy ( the bests an old mattress. Plexiglas is

, gealiné & weak material and earns scrathes very fast!

foam Put the canopy am tke:weak base and glue the sealing
foam strip around the canopy frame, towards the
inside, ,

The fuselage frame should be insulated with fat
so that nothing can be fixed there. Also use tape.

If you have prepared all meterials and tools, you

begin to press a fine equal rope of silicone around
xt the canopy, close to the foam strip. It can be

good thick. After this you press a second rope.

Then you set the canopy softly on the fuselage, and
close the canopy levers. .

After this comes the third rope. The silicone mate-
rial should be plenty enough:

spread out the silicone around the frame, add ma-
terial if it is not enough for the next step:
take the-sharp spatula and pull it in a single
walk- around exactly on the frame, using fuselage
and tape on the canopy as conduction.

The problem is: if it was not going to your sa-
tisfaction, then you have time in maximum for a
second walk-around before the material begins to
harden,
The whole thing must be storaged in silence during 1 - 2 days.
Then you take a sharp fine knife and later a japanese spatula
for to loose the canopy frame from fuselage.
This method you can use on all possible canopies and you can
eliminate some whistling gan.


--- Page 58 ---
604

putty
sealed
canopy

polish

ais et .

The sealing with the bycicle- valve tube
is certainly not the newest; it was used

oo? almost in the first SALTO. It is only

£ possible in massive frames from FRDP:
with a little special tool you mill a
groove into the basis of the frame, ca
3 mm deep. Fittings are surrounded softly.

On @ place which you can reach during
flying, you piace the enda of the tube,
which will be installed in the groove

Va a AN 8 . .
ge? vee with contact glue. The endS are imbedded
ane into an instrument tube, on which you

connect -a..rubber ball (blood pressure
indicatc#). So you can adjust the sealing
following the temperature necessary.

The plastic putty sealed canopy is certainly the solution of

the most comfort. But onethécone side it needs the most per-
fection of worker, on the:dther hand it is relatively sensi-
tive against hard closing: @8iiv of the wind!).

In much cases the lot of ‘patience when installing such a sea-
ling will not be honoured, the larger the canopy the minder.
Plexiglas is working much in temperature changes, so that your
canopy will fit exactly only in a narrow area of temperature.
If it sits proper in 29° C, you can get angry in ~ 5°.

Also a very strong installed canopy may not be undangerous.
The necessary of working is present, and if the Canopy has not
the possibility ¢o follow it, the tension gets possible un-
controlled so that you earn a crash!

If your canopy is no more good transparent or has scrapes you
should polish it. :

In hard casea, if the scrapes are deep, you need in the begin
of the procedure abrasive paper of 600 or 400. You take than
the next finer, and sa you will end at least at 1000 or 1200.
Wet grinding is better than dry.

After this comes the special polish work. Only experienced
people can take the angle machine with a fabric disk (not the
normal angle grinder — its velocity is nearly 10 000 rpm, this
of the special machine perhaps 2 - 300.) Tf you are not very
attentive and the polished spot gets warm you can earn a buckle!
So for not so trained people it is better to use a fine polish
solution for cars and do i+ by hands.

In such cases if the unprotected canopy will be moved often
on its base you can help with a cover of self-gluing plastic
foil.


--- Page 59 ---
Sealing of a plastic putty frame:

(GLASFLUGEL and others)

Suppose that you: lost your canopy, or
may be just want to have a spare. We'll
describe the entire procedure, and
thereby cover all the simpler cases.
You ,wil} need:

Avrcanopy frame, .

The untrimmed Plexiglass,

Appropriate metal fittings and screws,
Epoxy, glass fiber, etce.: plexiglass glue

The-Pleviglass comes with a protective
_ payer on it; leave it on, wherever
Ho glpe:need. be applied, for protection.

A First you have to fit the frame. Place all fittings
and. closing equipment on its place. Adjust the frame °
around so that it shows a distance of ca 3 - 4 mm e
around the fuselage contour (thickness of Plexi). aS.

Caution: some later Libelle and the SALTO serial I
have a frame with a step so that the plexi sits on
the step and the step fite with the fuselage contour.
Tf the frame fits to your satisfaction, the fittings

will be-glued to the frame with fast polyester .o ‘
resin. Than you move it carefully and screw them to tape
the frame.

U
2 Now you adjust the plexighags. Cut it raw with a
angle cutter with a veryikit¢le disk and equa-
lize it with the anglegrinders s .
Set the plexi on the fuselage. It must fit : "Bel ‘
close to the frame when the glass is sitting, oiece
on little pieces of balsawood ca 5 mm thick °~

around the frame Never the plexi should be uses P27
as stroke on the fuselage.
During this progedure the frame must be fastened

in its close fittings. Never put a canopy glass
on a:separate frame, this will never fit!

4 prill first 6 to 8 holes for the screws,
fix the plexi there and drill then the other |
needed holes (2,5 mm 9 for screws 2,9 mm 9)
Remove the canopy, light fixed on frame

4 Protect the plexi on the inside with a tape
directlyfon top of the frame. Cut with a
sharp knife softly around the frame. If
you remove then the screws you can loose
this strip of protection foil. Here must
be grinded the vlexi. and also the frame

5 protect the fuselage with a tape and some

fat. Wis the frames correctly: on the fuse-
lage. Mix the glue following the direc-
tives and spread it out over the upper
region of the prepared frame. Than you
set up the plexi and screw it - but soft-
iy for to avoid crashes running from the
screw holes.

he a

Some newer canopy frames have a cross


--- Page 60 ---
63

The screws should be first fastened and then
loose again for ca 1/4 turn. This will avoid -
the little cracks around the gtrews,

6G If the thing is dry, you take a bunch
of rovings, wet it with epoxy mix and
Place it into the gap between the
plexi and the fuselage. With this you
can fill nearly all the place so
that on-the one side you need not so
much putty which is rigid and for
this sensitive against shocks, on
the other side you have protected
the plexi too.

SB Now the outer contour of the canopy .
' Seems nearly o.k. the rest is done
by putty and laquer. the claims to
the fitting quality are different
and so the time for the finish work
changes. re

When starting. the finish work you
place aiprotection tape outside of i,
the canopy’ nearly parallel to the
one of the inside. And then you
need a quiet hand — take the sharp
= knife and follow the line of the
.tape around the canopy. after this
. you ¢an remove this strip of pro-
, tection foil and then you grind
‘this area for to prepare it for
‘good sitting putty and laquer.

@ iit you .are Satisfied with the work
‘you can remove all auxiliary
‘and protection material. In some
cases the protection foil is not
moving very wellj then you need
water or spirit ~ never nitro
thinner!


--- Page 61 ---
FOr

Ticking for ‘Performance.

Please do not await the deepest secrets of record fliers.
_ Almost simple measures can bring notable better performance;
for this they should be observed much more, -

C.G. Position;

The most important mean to make more from your plane, and
also the surest method to ruin a lot is the 0.G position.
“ Sometimes one's hairs are raising when observing the sins
in this matter. :

it is clear that a wing with a relatively high aspect ratio
has a better performance than a not so wide one ~ but also

a little possible area of useable C.G. If a modern airfoil
will allow an area of let us say 30 - 45% reduced wing chord -
so you have on a wing as SALTO and Libelle, both with nearly
630 mm reduced wing chord, not more than 100 mm. Inside of
this little border you find all optimals, from best sinking.
to best glide ratio, and for this you have to balance really
exagtly if you wish to meet the far the case desired optimum.

So you should use the next rainy sunday and find out your
personal flight ¢.G. - you will be astonished about the
success!

You need; a place for!the‘connected plane, with possible

even ground, a wood-Rowing: the angle between fuselage
surface and horizontal’ this you find in your Flight and
Servuce Manual - a scale for the tail weight, and two helpers.

First you have balanced exactly your plane, than yourself
with all the equipment which you need during flying: hat;
parachute, photo, breakfast eta., each on its place. Be
clear that f.i. other shoes can reach a different C.G.!

In your FSM you find a drawing how you should adjust your ..
plane for the ¢.G. ascertainmant, also the formula. Sit in u.
your plane, let held the wings horizontal with two fingers

and ket look the second “pelper for the tail weight.

Installed in the formula, you can calculate your 0.G flight
position in mms. For to change this in I of reduced wing

chord, you need this from your sailplane manufacturer. He -
should tell you 1. the area, 2. the optimums. —

Look that your personal flight c.G. is near of the optimum
either for climbing or for gliding. With sitting position
or eyuipment you should gamble @ little; in the most cases
you can avoid this Lot of lead which I have seen in some
planes.


--- Page 62 ---
FO"

The second check point you need is the zero position of your”
elevator. When a helper held the’ elevator in its zero posi-
tion, you take a little ledge preferable from Balsawood for
to adjust the delivered position of your stick referred to
the instrument panel or another fizpoint.

The third is a little water balance which you can buy in
hobbyworker's shops. You place it inside -of the fuselage
on @ spot you can observe during flight. It shows you the
exact horizontal position of your plane.

During the next flight in preferable quiet air you can
check now if your Plane is flying at the velocity of best
Sliding ratio with no redundant drag: straight fuselage,
zero elevator.

Certainly the same for bes+ sinking. Now you can calibrate
your plane for the task you have in eyes. For aerobatic
pilots specially it is indispensable to know his precise
C.G. position because some figures, Specially these with
broken airflow, aze only to fly eXactly with the C.G. in
@ special precise position. -

(Tip for SALTO pilots: the best gliding ¢.G. is at 300-mums,
the possible area of C.¢. ig 235 ~ 335 mms, = 30 - 43%.)

Aileron endplates;

This penny Cheap article can help you to circle for ca

8 km/h slower than ‘without! ¥ew-éan do it yourself from
a piece of stiff plastic foil} ‘plywood etc.

They must be a little larger than the biggest aileron
deflection for to avoid a blocking of aileron. After
installing the plates the aileron must be to move fully
free over the. whole area and have a distance to the wing
of ca 1,5 mms,. You should colour the Plates striking so

that you avoid to catch on it.
The endplate is only effegtful on the aileron root.

he


--- Page 63 ---
Cockpit airflow
peep airilow

You have pleasure if your cockpit is ggod airflowed on hot
days. But are you sure that the incoming air can gornut icf
the plane without redundant drag? If the air find no holes
for to stream out through the fuselage and leave the plane
behind the tail, it looks for other possibilities; press
through the Canopy gaps and disturb the airstream over the
wings.

Tf you find necessary to drill holes for the leaving aiz,
please be sure that you will not damage carrying parts,
Better to ask the manufacturer.

Sealing

If you have a plane with through- going airbrake houses,
you can reach only some success with silicone sealing paste.
All other means may be payed with a bad fitting of the
brakes.

But the most planes with an airbrake system Hitter (he was
the inventor of these so-called Sabempp-Hirth- brakes) have
today separated houses so that you have no sealing problems.

Sealing of the aileron with inside tapes is only -possible
on ailerons with center hinging (GLASFLUGEL, SALTO). In
former times one used for this teflon tapes, which you ‘bad
to remove if the aileron must be dismantled. Now we have
this simple "ye Sealing tape from Tesa which you can buy
in homeworker's shops, it is a sealing for windows but fits
wonderful in our planes, also for tails.

It is also to use in some shell-hinging aileron systema.

Sealing with outside nylon buckled tapes: you should be
sure that this is a win for your airfoil and not a Lost;
you should ask your manufacturer before using.

On SALTO's you should avoid to use this, specially on the
tail!

Sealing the gaps between wing and fuselage: nobody has
invented a better solution than these plastic tapes which
move sometimes the laquer from the wings. The only method
which looks acceptable is to use first a wider one, to
cut it with a knife and rest it on the parts; on this
tape is glued a smaller one which seals and will be re-
moved when the plane gets disconnacted.

Water ballast installing

is a "big change" and has to be licensed fo this type of
planes. The installing must be done under the eyes and
with the confirming of 4 licensed person. The manufactu-
rers held in stock parts for the installing,

The same is valid for adjusted wing enlarging.

Make a little gymnastique and look for the
exact closing of your gear covers. The
measures of a wind channel are related ever
to really sniodth fuselages!

+O


--- Page 64 ---

