# CHAPTER 1.  WOOD STRUCTURE

SECTION 1.  MATERIALS AND PRACTICES
1-1. GENERAL.  Wood aircraft construc-
tion dates back to the early days of certificated
aircraft. Today only a limited number of wood
aircraft structures are produced. However,
many of the older airframes remain in service.
With proper care, airframes from the 1930’s
through the 1950’s have held up remarkably
well considering the state of technology and
long term experience available at that time.  It
is the responsibility of the mechanic to carefully
inspect such structures for deterioration and
continuing airworthiness.
1-2. WOODS.
a. Quality of Wood.  All wood and ply-
wood used in the repair of aircraft structures
should be of aircraft quality (reference Army
Navy 
Commerce 
Department 
Bulletin
ANC-19, Wood Aircraft Inspection and Fabri-
cation).  Table 1-1 lists some permissible
variations in characteristics and properties of
aircraft wood.  However, selection and ap-
proval of woodstock for aircraft structural use
are specialized skills and should be done by
personnel who are thoroughly familiar with in-
spection criteria and methods.
b. Substitution of Original Wood.  The
wood species used to repair a part should be
the same as that of the original whenever pos-
sible; however, some permissible substitutes
are given in table 1-1.  Obtain approval from
the airframe manufacturer or the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) for the re-
placement of modified woods or other non-
wood products with a substitute material.
c. Effects of Shrinkage.  When the
moisture content of a wooden part is lowered,
the part shrinks.  Since the shrinkage is not
equal in all directions, the mechanic should
consider the effect that the repair may have on
the completed structure.  The shrinkage is
greatest in a tangential direction (across the fi-
bers and parallel to the growth rings), some-
what less in a radial direction (across the fibers
and perpendicular to the growth rings), and is
negligible in a longitudinal direction (parallel
to the fibers).  Figure 1-1 illustrates the differ-
ent grain directions and the effects of shrink-
age on the shape of a part.  These dimensional
changes can have several detrimental effects
upon a wood structure, such as loosening of
FIGURE 1-1. Relative shrinkage of wood members due to drying.

--- PAGE 36 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-2
Par 1-2
TABLE 1-1. Selection and Properties of Aircraft Wood.  (See notes following table.)
Species of Wood
Strength proper-
ties as compared
to spruce
Maximum
permissible
grain deviation
 (slope of grain)
Remarks
1.
2.
3.
4.
Spruce(Picea) Sitka (P.
Sitchensis) Red (P. Rubra)
White (P. Glauca).
100%
1:15
Excellent for all uses.  Considered as standard for
this table.
Douglas Fir
(Pseudotsuga Taxifolia).
Exceeds spruce.
1:15
May be used as substitute for spruce in same sizes
or in slightly reduced sizes providing reductions are
substantiated.  Difficult to work with handtools.
Some tendency to split and splinter during fabrica-
tion and considerable more care in manufacture is
necessary.  Large solid pieces should be avoided
due to inspection difficulties.  Gluing satisfactory.
Noble Fir
(Abies Nobiles).
Slightly exceeds
spruce except
8% deficient in
shear.
1:15
Satisfactory characteristics with respect to work-
ability, warping, and splitting.  May be used as di-
rect substitute for spruce in same sizes providing
shear does not become critical.  Hardness some-
what less than spruce.  Gluing satisfactory.
Western Hemlock
(Tsuga Heterpphylla).
Slightly exceeds
spruce.
1:15
Less uniform in texture than spruce.  May be used
as direct substitute for spruce.  Upland growth su-
perior to lowland growth.  Gluing satisfactory.
Pine, Northern White (Pinus
Strobus).
Properties be-
tween 85 % and
96 % those of
spruce.
1:15
Excellent working qualities and uniform in proper-
ties, but somewhat low in hardness and shock-
resisting capacity.  Cannot be used as substitute
for spruce without increase in sizes to compensate
for lesser strength.  Gluing satisfactory.
White Cedar, Port Orford
(Charaecyparis Lawsoni-
ana).
Exceeds spruce.
1:15
May be used as substitute for spruce in same sizes
or in slightly reduced sizes providing reductions are
substantiated.  Easy to work with handtools.  Glu-
ing difficult, but satisfactory joints can be obtained
if suitable precautions are taken.
Poplar, Yellow (Liriodendrow
Tulipifera).
Slightly less than
spruce except in
compression
(crushing) and
shear.
1:15
Excellent working qualities.  Should not be used as
a direct substitute for spruce without carefully ac-
counting for slightly reduced strength properties.
Somewhat low in shock-resisting capacity.  Gluing
satisfactory.
Notes for Table 1-1
1. Defects Permitted.
a. Cross grain.  Spiral grain, diagonal grain, or a combination of the two is acceptable providing the grain does
not diverge from the longitudinal axis of the material more than specified in column 3.  A check of all four faces of the
board is necessary to determine the amount of divergence.  The direction of free-flowing ink will frequently assist in
determining grain direction.
b. Wavy, curly, and interlocked grain.  Acceptable, if local irregularities do not exceed limitations specified for
spiral and diagonal grain.
c. Hard knots.  Sound, hard knots up to 3/8 inch in maximum diameter are acceptable providing:  (1)  they are
not projecting portions of I-beams, along the edges of rectangular or beveled unrouted beams, or along the edges of
flanges of box beams (except in lowly stressed portions);  (2)  they do not cause grain divergence at the edges of
the board or in the flanges of a beam more than specified in column 3; and  (3)  they are in the center third of the
beam and are not closer than 20 inches to another knot or other defect (pertains to 3/8 inch knots—smaller knots
may be proportionately closer).  Knots greater than 1/4 inch must be used with caution.
d. Pin knot clusters.  Small clusters are acceptable providing they produce only a small effect on grain direction.
e. Pitch pockets.  Acceptable in center portion of a beam providing they are at least 14 inches apart when they
lie in the same growth ring and do not exceed 1-1/2 inches length by 1/8 inch width by 1/8 inch depth, and providing
they are not along the projecting portions of I-beams, along the edges of rectangular or beveled unrouted beams, or
along the edges of the flanges of box beams.
f. Mineral streaks. Acceptable, providing careful inspection fails to reveal any decay.

--- PAGE 37 ---
9/27/01
AC 43.13-1B CHG 1
Par 1-2
Page 1-3
TABLE 1-1. Selection and Properties of Aircraft Wood.  (See notes following table.) (continued)
2. Defects Not Permitted.
a. Cross grain.  Not acceptable, unless within limitations noted in 1a.
b. Wavy, curly, and interlocked grain.  Not acceptable, unless within limitations noted in 1b.
c. Hard knots.  Not acceptable, unless within limitations noted in 1c.
d. Pin knot clusters.  Not acceptable, if they produce large effect on grain direction.
e. Spike knots.  These are knots running completely through the depth of a beam perpendicular to the annual
rings and appear most frequently in quarter-sawed lumber.  Reject wood containing this defect.
f. Pitch pockets.  Not acceptable, unless within limitations noted in 1e.
g. Mineral streaks.  Not acceptable, if accompanied by decay (see 1f).
h. Checks, shakes, and splits.  Checks are longitudinal cracks extending, in general, across the annual rings.
Shakes are longitudinal cracks usually between two annual rings.  Splits are longitudinal cracks induced by artificially
induced stress.  Reject wood containing these defects.
i.
Compression wood.  This defect is very detrimental to strength and is difficult to recognize readily.  It is char-
acterized by high specific gravity, has the appearance of an excessive growth of summer wood, and in most species
shows little contrast in color between spring wood and summer wood.  In doubtful cases reject the material, or sub-
ject samples to toughness machine test to establish the quality of the wood.  Reject all material containing compres-
sion wood.
j.
Compression failures.  This defect is caused from the wood being overstressed in compression due to natu-
ral forces during the growth of the tree, felling trees on rough or irregular ground, or rough handling of logs or lumber.
Compression failures are characterized by a buckling of the fibers that appear as streaks on the surface of the piece
substantially at right angles to the grain, and vary from pronounced failures to very fine hairlines that require close
inspection to detect.  Reject wood containing obvious failures.  In doubtful cases reject the wood, or make a further
inspection in the form of microscopic examination or toughness test, the latter means being the more reliable.
k. Decay.  Examine all stains and discoloration carefully to determine whether or not they are harmless, or in a
stage of preliminary or advanced decay.  All pieces must be free from rot, dote, red heart, purple heart, and all other
forms of decay.
fittings and wire bracing and checking or
splitting of wood members.  A few suggestions
for minimizing these shrinkage effects are:
(1) Use bushings that are slightly short
so that when the wood member shrinks the
bushings do not protrude and the fittings may
be tightened firmly against the member.
(2) Gradually drop off plywood face-
plates by feathering as shown in figure 1-2.
(3) Thoroughly seal all wood surfaces,
particularly end grain and bolt holes, with var-
nish, epoxy, or other acceptable sealer to slow
or prevent moisture changes in the member.
(See Section 5. Finishing Wood Structures.)
1-3. MODIFIED WOOD PRODUCTS.
The most common forms of modified woods
found in aircraft construction are plywood.
Although not a wood product, Phenolic parts
are sometimes incorporated into structures.
These products are used whenever the manu-
FIGURE 1-2. Tapering of faceplate.
facturer requires specialized strength or dura-
bility characteristics.
1-4. ADHESIVES.  Because of the critical
role played by adhesives in aircraft structure,
the mechanic must employ only those types of
adhesives that meet all of the performance re-
quirements necessary for use in certificated
civil aircraft.  Use each product strictly in ac-
cordance with the aircraft and adhesive manu-
facturer’s instructions.
a. Adhesives acceptable to the FAA can
be identified in the following ways:

--- PAGE 38 ---
AC 43.13-1B CHG 1
9/27/01
Page 1-4
Par 1-4
(1) Refer to the aircraft maintenance or
repair manual for specific instructions on ac-
ceptable adhesive selection for use on that type
aircraft.
(2) Adhesives meeting the requirements
of a Military Specification (Mil Spec), Aero-
space Material Specification (AMS), or Tech-
nical Standard Order (TSO) for wooden air-
craft structures are satisfactory providing they
are found to be compatible with existing
structural materials in the aircraft and the fab-
rication methods to be used in the repair.
b. Common types of adhesives that are
or have been used in aircraft structure fall into
two general groups: casein and synthetic-
resins.  Adhesive technology continues to
evolve, and new types (meeting the require-
ments of paragraph 1-4a) may become avail-
able in the future.
(1) Casein adhesive performance is
generally considered inferior to other products
available today, modern adhesives should be
considered first.
CAUTION:  Casein adhesive deterio-
rates over the years after exposure to
moisture in the air and temperature
variations.  Some modern adhesives
are incompatible with casein adhesive.
If a joint that has previously been
bonded with casein is to be rebonded
with another type adhesive, all traces
of the casein must be scraped off be-
fore the new adhesive is applied.  If
any casein adhesive is left, residual al-
kalinity may cause the new adhesive to
fail to cure properly.
(2) Synthetic-resin adhesives comprise
a broad family which includes plastic resin
glue, resorcinol, hot-pressed Phenol, and ep-
oxy.
(3) Plastic resin glue (urea-formalde-
hyde resin glue) has been used in wood aircraft
for many years.  Caution should be used due to
possible rapid deterioration (more rapidly than
wood) of plastic resin glue in hot, moist envi-
ronments and under cyclic swell-shrink stress.
For these reasons, urea-formaldehyde should
be considered obsolete for all repairs.  Any
proposed use of this type adhesive should be
discussed with the appropriate FAA office
prior to using on certificated aircraft.
(4) Federal 
Specification 
MMM-A-
181D and Military Specification MIL-A-22397
both describe a required series of tests that
verify the chemical and mechanical properties
of resorcinol. Resorcinol is the only known
adhesive recommended and approved for use
in wooden aircraft structure and fully meets
necessary strength and durability requirements.
Resorcinol adhesive (resorcinol-formaldehyde
resin) is a two-part synthetic resin adhesive
consisting of resin and a hardener.  The appro-
priate amount of hardener (per manufacturer’s
instruction) is added to the resin, and it is
stirred until it is uniformly mixed; the adhesive
is now ready for immediate use.  Quality of fit
and proper clamping pressure are both critical
to the achievement of full joint strength.  The
adhesive bond lines must be very thin and uni-
form in order to achieve full joint strength.
CAUTION:  Read and observe mate-
rial safety data.  Be sure to follow the
manufacturer’s instructions regarding
mixing, open assembly and close as-
sembly times, and usable temperature
ranges.
(5) Phenol-formaldehyde adhesive is
commonly used in the manufacturing of air-
craft grade plywood.  This product is cured at
elevated temperature and pressure; therefore, it
is not practical for use in structural repair.

--- PAGE 39 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-4
Page 1-5
(6) Epoxy adhesives are a two-part
synthetic resin product, and are acceptable
providing they meet the requirements of para-
graph 1-4a.  Many new epoxy resin systems
appear to have excellent working properties.
They have been found to be much less critical
of joint quality and clamping pressure.  They
penetrate well into wood and plywood.  How-
ever, joint durability in the presence of ele-
vated temperature or moisture is inadequate in
many epoxies.  The epoxy adhesives generally
consist of a resin and a hardener that are mixed
together in the proportions specified by the
manufacturer.  Depending on the type of ep-
oxy, pot life may vary from a few minutes to
an hour.  Cure times vary between products.
CAUTION:  Some epoxies may have
unacceptable thermal or other hidden
characteristics not obvious in a shop
test.  It is essential that only those
products meeting the requirements of
paragraph 1-4a be used in aircraft re-
pair.  Do not vary the resin-to-
hardener ratio in an attempt to alter
the cure time.  Strength, thermal, and
chemical resistance will be adversely
affected.  Read and observe material
safety data.  Be sure to follow the ad-
hesive manufacturer’s instructions re-
garding mixing, open and closed cur-
ing time, and usable temperature
ranges.
1-5. BONDING PRECAUTIONS.  Satis-
factory bond joints in aircraft will develop the
full strength of wood under all conditions of
stress.  To produce this result, the bonding op-
eration must be carefully controlled to obtain a
continuous thin and uniform film of solid ad-
hesive in the joint with adequate adhesion and
penetration to both surfaces of the wood.
Some of the more important conditions in-
volve:
a. Properly prepared wood surfaces.
b. Adhesive of good quality, properly
prepared, and properly selected for the task at
hand.
c. Good bonding technique, consistent
with the adhesive manufacturer’s instructions
for the specific application.
1-6. PREPARATION OF WOOD SUR-
FACES FOR BONDING.  It is recommended
that no more time than necessary be permitted
to elapse between final surfacing and bonding.
Keep prepared surfaces covered with a clean
plastic sheet or other material to maintain
cleanliness prior to the bonding operation.
The mating surfaces should be machined
smooth and true with planers, joiners, or spe-
cial miter saws.  Planer marks, chipped or
loosened grain, and other surface irregularities
are not permitted.  Sandpaper must never be
used to smooth softwood surfaces that are to
be bonded.  Sawn surfaces must approach
well-planed surfaces in uniformity, smooth-
ness, and freedom from crushed fibers.  It is
advisable to clean both joint surfaces with a
vacuum cleaner just prior to adhesive applica-
tion.  Wood surfaces ready for bonding must
be free from oil, wax, varnish, shellac, lacquer,
enamel, dope, sealers, paint, dust, dirt, adhe-
sive, crayon marks, and other extraneous mate-
rials.
a. Roughening smooth, well-planed sur-
faces of normal wood before bonding is not
recommended.  Such treatment of well-planed
wood surfaces may result in local irregularities
and objectionable rounding of edges.  When
surfaces cannot be freshly machined before
bonding, such as plywood or inaccessible
members, very slight sanding of the surface
with a fine grit such as 220, greatly improves
penetration by the adhesive of aged or polished

--- PAGE 40 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-6
Par 1-6
surfaces.  Sanding should never be continued
to the extent that it alters the flatness of the
surface.  Very light sanding may also improve
the wetting of the adhesive to very hard or
resinous materials.
b. Wetting tests are useful as a means of
detecting the presence of wax, old adhesive,
and finish.  A drop of water placed on a sur-
face that is difficult to wet and thus difficult to
bond will not spread or wet the wood rapidly
(in seconds or minutes).  The surface may be
difficult to wet due to the presence of wax, ex-
posure of the surface to heat and pressure as in
the manufacture of hot press bonded plywood,
the presence of synthetic resins or wood ex-
tractives, or simply chemical or physical
changes in the wood surface with time.  Good
wettability is only an indication that a surface
can be bonded satisfactorily.  After performing
wetting tests, allow adequate time for wood to
dry before bonding.  Preliminary bonding tests
and tests for bond strength are the only posi-
tive means of actually determining the bonding
characteristics of the adhesive and material
combinations.  (See paragraph 1-29h.)
1-7. APPLYING THE ADHESIVE.  To
make a satisfactory bonded joint, spread the
adhesive in a thin, even layer on both surfaces
to be joined.  It is recommended that a clean
brush be used and care taken to see that all sur-
faces are covered.  Spreading of adhesive on
only one of the two surfaces is not recom-
mended.  Be sure to read and follow the adhe-
sive manufacturer’s application instructions.
1-8. ASSEMBLY TIME IN BONDING.
Resorcinol, epoxy, and other adhesives cure as
a result of a chemical reaction.  Time is an im-
portant consideration in the bonding process.
Specific time constraints are as follows:
a. Pot life is the usable life of the adhesive
from the time that it is mixed until it must be
spread onto the wood surface.  Once pot life
has expired, the remaining adhesive must be
discarded.  Do not add thinning agents to the
adhesive to extend the life of the batch.
b. Open assembly time is the period from
the moment the adhesive is spread until the
parts are clamped together.   Where surfaces
are coated and exposed freely to the air, some
adhesives experience a much more rapid
change in consistency than when the parts are
laid together as soon as the spreading has been
completed.
c. Closed assembly time is the period
from the moment that the structure parts are
placed together until clamping pressure is ap-
plied.  The consistency of the adhesive does
not change as rapidly when the parts are laid
together.
d. Pressing (or clamping) time is the pe-
riod during which the parts are pressed tightly
together and the adhesive cures.  The pressing
time must be sufficient to ensure that joint
strength is adequate before handling or ma-
chining the bonded structure.
NOTE:  Follow the adhesive manufac-
turer’s instructions for all time limits
in the bonding process.  If the recom-
mended open or closed assembly peri-
ods are exceeded, the bond process
should not be continued.  Discard the
parts if feasible.  If the parts cannot be
discarded, remove the partially cured
adhesive and clean the bond line per
adhesive manufacturer’s instructions
before application of new adhesive.
1-9. BONDING TEMPERATURE.  Tem-
perature of the bond line affects the cure rate
of the adhesive.  Some adhesive types, such as
resorcinol, require a minimum temperature
which must be maintained throughout the

--- PAGE 41 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-9
Page 1-7
curing process.  Each type of adhesive requires
a specific temperature during the cure cycle,
and the manufacturer’s recommendations
should be followed.
1-10. CLAMPING PRESSURE.
a. Use the recommended pressure to
squeeze adhesive out into a thin, continuous
film between the wood layers.  This forces air
from the joint and brings the wood surfaces
into intimate contact.  Pressure should be ap-
plied to the joint before the adhesive  becomes
too thick to flow and is accomplished by
means of clamps, presses, or other mechanical
devices.
b. Nonuniform 
clamping 
pressure
commonly results in weak and strong areas in
the same joint.  The amount of pressure re-
quired to produce strong joints in aircraft as-
sembly operations varies with the type of ad-
hesive used and the type of wood to be
bonded.  Typical pressures when using resor-
cinol may vary from 125 to 150 pounds per
square 
inch 
for 
softwoods 
and 
150 to
200 pounds per square inch for hardwoods.
Insufficient pressure or poorly machined wood
surfaces usually result in thick bond lines,
which indicate a weak joint, and should be
carefully guarded against.  Some epoxy adhe-
sives require much less clamping pressure to
produce acceptable joint strength.  Be sure to
read and follow the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions in all cases.
1-11. METHOD OF APPLYING PRES-
SURE.  The methods of applying pressure to
joints in aircraft bonding  operations range
from the use of brads, nails, small screws, and
clamps; to the use of hydraulic and electrical
power presses.  The selection of appropriate
clamping means is important to achieving
sound bond joints.
a. Hand nailing is used rather extensively
in the bonding of ribs and in the application of
plywood skins to the wing, control surfaces,
and fuselage frames.  Small brass screws may
also be used advantageously when the par-
ticular parts to be bonded are relatively small
and do not allow application of pressure by
means of clamps.  Both  nails and screws pro-
duce adverse after effects.  There is consider-
able risk of splitting small parts when  install-
ing nails or screws.  Metal fasteners also pro-
vide vulnerable points for moisture to enter
during service.
b. On small joints using thin plywood for
gussets or where plywood is used as an outer
skin, the pressure is usually applied by nailing
or stapling.  Thin plywood nailing strips are
often used to spread the nailing pressure over a
larger area and to facilitate removal of the nails
after the adhesive has cured.
c. The size of the nails must vary with
the size of the members.  If multiple rows of
nails are required, the nails should be 1 inch
apart in rows spaced 1/2 inch apart.  The nails
in adjacent rows should be staggered.  In no
case should the nails in adjacent rows be more
than 3/4 inch from the nearest nail.  The length
of the nails should be such that they penetrate
the wood below the joint at least 3/8 inch.  In
the case of small members, the end of the nail
should not protrude through the member below
the joint.  Hit the nails with several light
strokes, just seating the head into the surface
of the gusset.  Be careful not to crush the wood
with a heavy hammer blow.
d. In some cases the nails are removed
after adhesive cure, while in others the nails
are left in place.  The nails are employed for
clamping pressure during adhesive cure and
must not be expected to hold members to-
gether in service.  In deciding whether to re

--- PAGE 42 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-8
Par 1-11
move nails after assembly, the mechanic
should examine adjacent structure to see
whether nails remain from original manufac-
ture.
e. On larger members (spar repairs for
example), apply pressure by means of screw
clamps, such as a cabinet-maker’s bar or
“C-clamps.”  Strips or blocks should be used
to distribute clamping pressure and protect
members from local crushing due to the
limited pressure area of the clamps, especially
when one member is thin (such as plywood).
The strip or block should be at least twice as
thick as the thinner member being bonded.
f. Immediately after clamping or nailing
a member, the mechanic must examine the en-
tire joint to assure uniform part contact and
adhesive squeeze-out.  Wipe away excess ad-
hesive.
1-12.1-17. [RESERVED.]

--- PAGE 43 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-18
Page 1-9 (and 1-10)
SECTION 2.  HEALTH AND SAFETY
1-18. GENERAL.  The possibility of an in-
jury is an important consideration when
working with wooden aircraft structures.  The
tools and machines used to shape wooden
members can be very dangerous.  In addition,
there are potential health hazards in working
with adhesives and finishes.  The mechanic
should follow manufacturer’s instructions
wherever applicable to prevent injury.  Federal
law mandates that individual chemical manu-
facturers are to provide Material Safety Data
Sheets (MSDS) with health hazard data to all
consumers.  First aid information and handling
precautions must also be identified.  Most of
the products used in wooden aircraft construc-
tion are flammable.  Some, such as dope and
paint, may be highly flammable.
1-19. SANDING IN AREAS OF EXIST-
ING BOND JOINTS AND FINISHES.
Some adhesives used in wooden aircraft con-
struction contain biocides.  A commonsense
precaution when machining or sanding exist-
ing structure is to wear a respirator to avoid
inhaling dust products.  To lower potential fire
hazards avoid using electric sanders around
dope, paints, and adhesives.
1-20. HANDLING OF ADHESIVES AND
FINISHES.  Most adhesives and finish prod-
ucts present at least some toxic potential to us-
ers.  Injury may occur from skin or eye contact,
inhalation, or accidental ingestion.  Users
should be aware of the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions and MSDS.
a. Appropriate skin, eye, ear, and respi-
ratory protection should be worn whenever in-
dicated.
b. Shop cleanliness is essential for health
and fire safety.
c. Shop 
personnel 
should 
maintain
awareness of others in the work area to assure
that bystanders are not injured.
d. Proper shop ventilation is essential to
disperse fumes emitted from adhesives such as
resorcinol and epoxy.
1-21.1-26. [RESERVED.]

--- PAGE 45 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-27
Page 1-11
SECTION 3.  INSPECTION
1-27. GENERAL.  Inspection of wooden
structure includes some methods, equipment,
and awareness of failure modes which are
unique to wooden aircraft.
1-28. TYPES 
OF 
DETERIORATION
AND DAMAGE.
a. Wood Decay.  Wood is an organic
product which is subject to attack by fungi.
Fungi are plants that grow on and in wood.
The moisture content of the wood nominally
will have to be 20 percent or greater to sustain
fungus growth.  The result of this growth is
called decay.  Decayed wood exhibits softness,
swelling if still wet, excessive shrinkage when
dry, cracking, and discoloration.  Repair or re-
place wood if any amount or form of decay is
found.
b. Splitting.  Splits or cracks in wooden
members occur along grain lines.  When the
moisture content of wood is lowered, its di-
mensions decrease.  The dimensional change is
greatest in a tangential direction (across the fi-
bers and parallel to the growth rings), some-
what less in a radial direction (across the fibers
and perpendicular to the growth rings), and is
negligible in a longitudinal direction (parallel
to the fibers).  These dimensional changes can
have detrimental effects upon a wood struc-
ture, particularly when two parts are bonded
together with grains in different directions.
This effect can often be seen where a plywood
doubler is bonded to a spruce member.  As the
spruce member dries, it attempts to shrink, but
is restrained by the plywood, which shrinks
less. The resulting stress in the spruce member
exceeds its cross-grain strength, and a split oc-
curs.
c. Bond Failure.  Bond joint failure is
generally due to improper fabrication tech-
nique or prolonged exposure to moisture in
service.  Although none of the older adhesives
have been specifically found to fail by simple
aging, the mechanic is advised to inspect all
accessible joints carefully.
d. Finish Failure.  The finish coat on
wood structure (usually varnish) is the last line
of defense to prevent water entry into wood
and the resulting decay.  Finish failure can be
the result of prolonged water exposure, wood
splitting, ultraviolet light exposure, or surface
abrasion.
e. Damage.  Stress, impact, or mechanical
damage to a wood structure is caused by ex-
cessive aerodynamic loads or impact loads oc-
curring while the aircraft is on the ground.
Overtightening of fittings can also cause
crushing of the underlying wood member and
possible bending of the metal fitting.
1-29. INSPECTION METHODS.  When-
ever possible, the aircraft should be kept in a
dry, well-ventilated hangar, with all inspection
covers, access panels, etc., removed for as long
as possible before final inspection.  The air-
craft should be given a preliminary inspection
when first removing the inspection covers and
access panels and inspected with a moisture
meter at this time.  If the moisture content is
high, the aircraft should be thoroughly dried.
If the aircraft is dry, this will facilitate later in-
spection, especially when determining the
condition of bonded joints.
a. Likely locations for wood structure
deterioration should be given special attention.
Most damage is caused by external influence
such as moisture, temperature extremes, or
sunlight.  Care should be taken to note all pos-
sible entry points for moisture, (i.e., cracks or
breaks in the finish, fastener holes, inspec-
tion/access openings, control system openings,
drain holes, and the interfaces of metal fittings

--- PAGE 46 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-12
Par 1-29
and the wood structure).  The mechanic should
also look for evidence of swelling or warpage
of the aircraft’s wood structure, which would
indicate underlying damage or decay.  Par-
ticular attention should be paid to the wood
structure immediately beneath the upper sur-
faces, especially under areas that are finished
in dark colors, for signs of deteriorating adhe-
sives.  Cracks in wood spars are often hidden
under metal fittings or metal rib flanges and
leading edge skins.  Any time a reinforcement
plate exists that is not feathered out on its
ends, a stress riser exists at the ends of the
plate.  A failure of the primary structure can be
expected to occur at this point.
b. Tapping the wood structure with a
light plastic hammer or screwdriver handle
should produce a sharp solid report.  If the
suspect area sounds hollow and soft, further
inspection is warranted by the following meth-
ods.
c. Probe the area in question, if accessi-
ble, with a sharp metal tool.  The wood struc-
ture should be solid and firm.  If the suspect
area feels soft and mushy the mechanic should
assume that the area is rotted.  Disassembly of
the structure is warranted at this point.
d. Prying the area of a bond joint will re-
veal any mechanical separation of the joint.  If
the mechanic detects any relative movement
between two adjacent wood members, a failure
of the bond is evident.  Any loose fittings
should arouse the mechanic’s suspicion, and
the fittings should be removed to check for
elongated bolt holes.  Disassembly is war-
ranted for further inspection.
e. Odor is an important indicator of pos-
sible deterioration.  During the initial inspec-
tion, as the access panels are being removed
from the structure, the mechanic should be
aware of any areas that smell musty or moldy.
These odors are indicative of the presence of
moisture and associated fungal growth and
decay.
f. Visual inspection requires looking at
the wood structure both externally and inter-
nally for visual signs of decay or physical
damage.  Any accumulations of dirt, bird nests,
or rodent nests are likely places to hold mois-
ture and promote decay.
(1) The mechanic should remove any
such accumulations that are found and inspect
the area for signs of decay.  Decay will appear
as a dark discoloration or gray stains running
along the grain and often a swelling of the
wood member if still wet.  Fittings will be
imbedded in the wood instead of flush.
(2) Highly suspected structurally dam-
aged areas are shown in figure 1-3.  A list of
most likely areas to incur structural damage in-
clude the following:
(a) Check front and rear spars for
compression cracks adjacent to the plywood
reinforcing plates, where the lift struts attach,
and at the rib attach points on either side of the
strut attach points.  Triple-check these areas
and the spar to fuselage attach points for
cracks if the wingtip has contacted the ground,
a hangar wall, etc.
(b) Check all metal fittings which
attach to wooden structure for looseness, cor-
rosion, cracks, or warps.  Areas of particular
interest are strut attach fittings, spar butt fit-
tings, aileron and flap hinges, jury strut fit-
tings, compression struts, pulley brackets, and
any landing gear fittings.
(c) Check front and rear spars for
longitudinal cracks at the ends of the plywood
reinforcement plates where the lift struts at-
tach.  Triple-check this area if the wing has en-
countered any kind of ground strike.

--- PAGE 47 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-29
Page 1-13
(d) Check ribs on either side of strut
attach points for missing or loose rib-to-spar
attach nails.
(e) Check ribs on either side of strut
attach points for cracks where the cap strips
pass over and under the spars.
(f) Check for cracked leading edge
skin and/or failed nose ribs in the area directly
in front of the jury strut.
(g) Check the brackets which attach
the struts to the spars for cracks.
(h) Check the aileron, flap hinge, and
hinge brackets for cracks and loose or missing
rivets.
(i) Check all exposed end grain
wood, particularly the spar butts, for cracking
or checking.  Checking, or splitting, of wood
spar butts is common on aircraft based in arid
areas.
FIGURE 1-3. Likely areas to incur structural damage.
(j) Also check for any cracks that in-
dicate a bond line failure or structural failure
of the wood member.  Any evidence of move-
ment of fittings, bushings, or fasteners should
be cause for concern, and further inspection is
warranted.  Splits in fabric covering the ply-
wood, especially on upper surfaces exposed to
ultraviolet light and water, dictate that the me-
chanic remove the fabric around the split so
the underlying plywood may be inspected for
physical damage or decay.  When removing
metal fasteners from wood, check for evidence
of corrosion.  Any corrosion present indicates
the presence of moisture and the strong prob-
ability of decay in the adjoining wood
structure.
(k) Any wooden member that has
been overstressed is subject to compression
failure (e.g., ground loop).  Compression
cracking and failure of the wood spars in cer-
tain aircraft are a continuing problem.  Com-
pression failures are defined as failure of wood
fibers on a plane perpendicular to the wood fi-
ber’s longitudinal axis.  If undetected, com-
pression failures may result in structural failure
of the wing during flight.  Compression cracks
have been found emanating from the upper
surfaces of the wing spars and progressing
downward.
(l) The usual locations for cracks
have been the front spar at both ends of the
reinforcement plate for the lift strut and the
front spar rib attach points, both inboard and
outboard of the spar reinforcement plate; and
the rear spar lift strut and rib attach points.  An
inspection of both the front and rear spars for
compression cracks is recommended.
(m) The two areas where it is possi-
ble to identify a compression crack are on the
face and top surface of the spar.  Using a
borescope through existing inspection holes is
one method of inspection.  An alternate
method is to cut inspection holes in the skin.
If inspection holes are cut, they should be
made on the aft side of the front spar and the
forward side of the rear spar.  This will allow
the fabric to be peeled away from the spar.
Longitudinal cracks may also be detected dur-
ing this inspection.  Loose or missing rib nails
may indicate further damage and should be
thoroughly investigated.  The mechanic may
shine a light, at a low angle and parallel with
the grain, in the area of the member

--- PAGE 48 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-14
Par 1-29
subjected to the compression load.  An area of
grain waviness would indicate a potential
compression failure. In all cases the manufac-
turer’s inspection data should be followed.
g. Moisture Meters are effective tools for
detection of excessive moisture content in
wood members.  An instrument such as this
allows the mechanic to insert a probe into the
wood member and read its moisture content di-
rectly off the meter.  A correction chart usually
accompanies the instrument to correct for tem-
perature and species of wood.  Any reading
over 20 percent indicates the probability of
fungus growth in the member.  Moisture con-
tent of the wood should be 8-16 percent, pref-
erably in the 10-12 percent range (this range is
during inspection).  Where plywood skin cov-
ers the spar and the spar would be inaccessible
without removing the skin, the moisture meter
probe can be inserted through the plywood
skin and into the spar to check the moisture
content of the spar.  The small holes made by
the probe are easily sealed.
h. Destructive testing of sample bonded
joints whenever a new bond joint is made, a
sample joint should be made with the adhesive
from the same batch used on the repair and
scraps of wood left over from the repair.  After
curing, the sample joint should be destruc-
tively tested to ensure proper bonding of the
two wood pieces.  Any failure in the bond line
indicates a cohesive failure of the adhesive.
Any failure along the bond line indicates an
adhesive failure, which is indicative of poor
bonding.  The ideal situation is when wood fi-
bers are observed on both sides of the fracture
surface.  This indicates a failure in the wood,
and indicates the bond joint is actually stronger
than the wood.
1-30.1-35. [RESERVED.]

--- PAGE 49 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-36 
Page 1-15
SECTION 4.  REPAIRS
1-36. GENERAL.  The basic standard for
any aircraft repair is that the repaired structure
must be as strong as the original structure and
be equivalent to the original in rigidity and
aerodynamic shape.  Repairs should be made
in accordance with manufacturer specifications
whenever such data is available.
1-37. REPLACEMENT 
OF 
DRAIN
HOLES AND SKIN STIFFENERS.  When-
ever repairs are made that require replacing a
portion that includes drain holes, skin stiffen-
ers, or any other items, the repaired portion
must be provided with similar drain holes, skin
stiffeners, or items of the same dimensions in
the same location.  Additional drain holes may
be required if reinforcement under a skin re-
pair interferes with waterflow to existing drain
holes.  Make any additional drain holes the
same diameter as originals, usually 1/4 inch.
1-38. CONTROL SURFACE FLUTTER
PRECAUTIONS.  When repairing or refin-
ishing control surfaces, especially on high-
performance airplanes, care must be exercised
that the repairs do not involve the addition of
weight aft of the hinge line.  Such a procedure
may adversely affect the balance of the surface
to a degree that could induce flutter.  As a gen-
eral rule, it will be necessary to repair control
surfaces in such a manner that the structure is
identical to the original, and that the stiffness,
weight distribution, and mass balance are not
affected in any way.  Consult the aircraft
maintenance manual or seek manufacturer’s
direction for specific requirements on checking
control surface balance after repair and refin-
ishing of any control surface.
1-39. SCARF JOINTS.  The scarf joint is
the most satisfactory method of making an end
joint between two solid wood members.  Cut
both parts accurately.  The strength of the
joints depends upon good joint design and a
thin, uniform bond line.  Make the scarf cut in
the general direction of the grain slope as
shown in figure 1-4.
No grain deviation steeper than
1 in 15 should be present in an outer
eighth of the depth of the spar.  In
adjacent eighths, deviations involving
steeper slopes, such as a wave in a
few growth layers, are unlikely to be
harmful.  Local grain slope deviations
in excess of those specified may be
permitted in spar flanges only in the
inner one-fourth of the flange depth.
FIGURE 1-4. Consideration of grain direction when
making scarf joints.
1-40. SPLICING OF SPARS.  Unless oth-
erwise specified by the manufacturer, a spar
may be spliced at any point except under the
wing attachment fittings, landing gear fittings,
engine mount fittings, or lift and interplane
strut fittings.  These fittings may not overlap
any part of the splice.  A spar splice repair
should not be made adjacent to a previous
splice or adjacent to a reinforcing plate.
Spacing between two splices or between a
splice and a reinforcing plate should be no less
than three times the length of the longer splice.

--- PAGE 50 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-16
Par 1-40
Splicing under minor fittings such as drag
wire, antidrag wire, or compression strut fit-
tings is acceptable under the following condi-
tions:
a. The reinforcement plates of the splice
should not interfere with the proper attachment
or alignment of the fittings.  Do not alter the
locations of pulley support brackets, bellcrank
support brackets, or control surface support
brackets.  Plates are to be tapered off, as de-
picted in figure 1-2.
b. The reinforcement plate may overlap
drag wire, antidrag wire, or compression strut
fittings, if the reinforcement plates are on the
rear face of the rear spar or the front face of the
front spar.  In such cases, it will be necessary
to install slightly longer bolts.  The front face
reinforcement plate should not overlap drag
strut fittings, except when it does not require
sufficient shortening of compression struts or
changes in drag-truss geometry, to prevent
adjustment for proper rigging.  Even though
take up is sufficient, it may be necessary to
change the angles on the fittings.  (Acceptable
methods for splicing the various types of spars
are shown in figure 1-4 through figure 1-9.)
Reinforcement plates must be used as indi-
cated on all scarf repairs to spars and the
slopes of scarves shown are minimum slopes.
1-41. SPAR REPLACEMENT.  Replace-
ment of spars is a major repair.  Spars may be
replaced by new parts made by the manufac-
turer or the holder of a Parts Manufacturer Ap-
proval (PMA) for that part.  Owner-produced
spars may be installed providing they are made
from a manufacturer-approved drawing.  Also,
a spar may be made by reference to an existing
spar providing sufficient evidence is presented
to verify that the existing spar is an original
part, and that all materials and dimensions can
be determined.  The dimensions and type of
wood used are critical to the structural strength
of the aircraft.  Care should be taken that any
replacement spars accurately match the manu-
facturer’s original design.
1-42. SPLICING OF BOX SPAR WEBS.
Always splice and reinforce plywood webs
with the same type of plywood as found on the
original part.  Do not use solid wood to replace
plywood webs.  Plywood is stronger in shear
than solid wood of the same thickness due to
the grain direction of the individual plies.  The
face-grain of plywood replacement webs and
reinforcement plates must be in the same di-
rection as the original member to ensure that
the new web will have the required strength.
(The method of splicing plywood webs is
shown in figure 1-9.)
1-43. REPLACING SOLID-TYPE SPARS
WITH LAMINATED-TYPE SPARS.  Solid
spars may be replaced with laminated spars or
vice versa, provided the material is of the same
high quality.  External reinforcements (ply-
wood or solid) must always be replaced as on
the original member.
1-44. SPAR LONGITUDINAL CRACKS
AND LOCAL DAMAGE.  Cracked spars
(except box spars) may be repaired by bonding
plates of spruce or plywood of sufficient
thickness to develop the longitudinal shear on
both sides of the spar.  Extend the plates well
beyond the termination of the cracks, as shown
in figure 1-10.  A method of repairing small
local damage to either the top or bottom side
of a spar is also shown in figure 1-10.
a. Longitudinal Cracking of 
Wood
Wing Spars of Aircraft Operating in Arid
Regions.  Aircraft having wood spars and op-
erating in arid regions may develop longitudi-
nal spar cracks in the vicinity of the plywood
reinforcement plates.  These cracks result from
the tendency of the spar to shrink when drying
takes place.  Plywood resists this tendency to

--- PAGE 51 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-44 
Page 1-17
Reinforcement plates to be spruce or plywood and should be bonded only,
with the ends feathered off at 5:1 slope as depicted in Figure 1-2.
Solid spars may be replaced with laminated spars or vice versa,
 provided the material is of the same high quality.
FIGURE 1-5. Method of splicing solid or laminated rectangular spars.
shrink and causes the basic spar stock to split
(see paragraph 1-2c).  Cracks start under the
plywood plates, usually (but not necessarily) at
a bolt hole or cutout, and usually spread in
each direction until they extend a short dis-
tance beyond the ends of the plates where the
resistance 
to 
spar 
shrinkage 
disappears.
Cracks have also been found in the butt end of
spars.  Other factors, which have been found
conducive to the formation of cracks are poor
protective finishes, large cutouts, and metal
fittings that utilize two lines of large diameter
bolts.
b. Repairing Cracks Versus Installing a
New Spar.  The presence of cracks does not
necessarily mean that the spar must be dis-
carded.  If the crack is not too long or too close
to either edge and can be reinforced properly,
it will probably be more economical and
satisfactory to perform repair rather than install
a new spar or section.  However, a generally
acceptable procedure suitable for all airplane
models is not available.  Because of the possi-
bility of strength deficiencies contact the
manufacturer.  In absence of the manufacturer,
the FAA should be contacted for approval be-
fore making repairs not in accordance with the
manufacturer-approved instructions or the rec-
ommendations of this advisory circular. Lon-
gitudinal cracking or the recurrence of crack-
ing can be minimized by ensuring that the
moisture content of the solid wood portion is
within the proper range before bonding.  In
arid desert areas, during bonding the moisture
content should be in the range of 6-8 percent
before 
bonding, 
but 
in 
other 
areas
10-12 percent is satisfactory.  If solid or ply-
wood repair stock is procured from another
climatic region, it should be allowed to season,

--- PAGE 52 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-18
Par 1-44
If splice is made where routing is feathered to full width of spar, tapered 
plates (conforming to the contour of the routing) should be added first;  
otherwise, the splice is the same as shown.
Reinforcement plates may be of plywood, the same material as the 
spar, or material of equal or higher quality; and should be bonded
only with ends feathered out with a 5:1 slope.
FIGURE 1-6. Method of splicing solid “I” spars.
in the same storage area as the part to be re-
paired, for no less than 2 weeks.
c. Preventing Cracks.  An important step
in the prevention of longitudinal cracking,
particularly in spar butts, is to ensure that the
wood is thoroughly sealed with a penetrating
and highly moisture-resistant finish.  Applica-
tion of a thin, slow-curing epoxy adhesive or
sealer can be very effective in slowing or pre-
venting moisture changes in spar butts.
1-45. ELONGATED HOLES IN SPARS.
In cases of elongated bolt holes in a spar, or
cracks in the vicinity of bolt holes, splice in a
new section of spar, or replace the spar en-
tirely.  If hole elongation or cracking is mini-
mal and the bolt holes are for noncritical fit-
tings, repair (rather than replacement) may be
feasible.  Obtain approval for any such repair
from the manufacturer or a representative of
the FAA.  In many cases, it has been found ad-
vantageous to laminate the new section of the
spar, particularly if the spar butts are being re-
placed.
1-46. RIB REPAIRS.  Ribs may be replaced
by new parts made by the manufacturer or the
holder of a PMA for that part.  Owner-
produced ribs may be installed providing they
are made from a manufacturer-approved
drawing or by reference to an existing original
rib.  A rib may be made by reference to an ex-
isting rib providing sufficient evidence is pre-
sented to verify that the existing rib is an
original part and that all materials and dimen-
sions can be determined.  The contour of the
rib is important to the safe flying qualities of
the aircraft, and care should be taken that any
replacement ribs accurately match the manu-
facturer’s original design.

--- PAGE 53 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-46
Page 1-19
Ends of reinforcement plates
should be feathered out
Section A-A
with a 5:1 slope.
FIGURE 1-7. Repairs to built-up “I” spar.
a. Rib 
Repair 
Methods. 
Acceptable
methods of repairing damaged ribs are shown
in figure 1-11.  Wood ribs should not be nailed
to wood spars by driving nails through the rib
cap strips, as this weakens the rib materially.
The attachment should be by means of adhe-
sive with cement coated, barbed, or spiraled
nails driven through the vertical rib members
on each face of the spar.
b. Compression Rib Repair.  Acceptable
methods of repairing damaged compression
ribs are shown in figure 1-12.
(1) Figure 1-12(A) illustrates the repair
of a compression rib of the “I” section type;
i.e., wide, shallow cap strips, and a center ply-
wood web with a rectangular compression
member on each side of the web.  The rib is
assumed to be cracked through the cap strips,
web member, and compression member in the
illustration.  Cut the compression member as
shown in figure 1-12(D).  Cut and replace the
aft portion of the cap strips, and reinforce as
shown in figure 1-11.  The plywood side plates
are bonded on, as indicated in figure 1-12(A).
These plates are added to reinforce the dam-
aged web.
(2) Figure 1-12(B) illustrates a com-
pression rib of the type that is basically a stan-
dard rib with rectangular compression mem-
bers added to one side and plywood web to the
other side.  The method used in this repair is
essentially the same as in figure 1-12(A) ex-
cept that the plywood reinforcement plate,

--- PAGE 54 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-20
Par 1-46
A, B, C, D = ORIGINAL DIMENSIONS
FIGURE 1-8. Method of splicing box spar flanges (plate method).
shown in section B-B, is continued the full
distance between spars.
(3) Figure 1-12(C) illustrates a com-
pression rib of the “I” type with a rectangular
vertical member on each side of the web.  The
method of repair is essentially the same as in
figure 1-12(A) except the plywood reinforce-
ment plates on each side, shown as striped
blocks in section C-C, are continued the full
distance between spars.
1-47. PLYWOOD SKIN REPAIR.  Make
extensive repairs to damaged stressed skin
plywood structures in accordance with specific
recommendations from the aircraft manufac-
turer.  It is recommended that repairs be made
by replacing the entire panel, from one struc-
tural member to the next, if damage is very
extensive.  When damaged plywood skin is re-
paired, carefully inspect the adjacent internal
structure for possible hidden damage.  Repair
any defective frame members prior to making
skin repairs.
1-48. DETERMINATION OF SINGLE
OR DOUBLE CURVATURE.  Much of the
outside surface of plywood aircraft is curved.
On such areas, plywood used for repairs to the
skin must be similarly curved.  Curved skins
are either of single curvature or of double
(compound) curvature.  A simple test to de-
termine which type of curvature exists may be
made by laying a sheet of heavy paper on the
surface in question.  If the sheet can be made
to conform to the surface without wrinkling,
the surface is either flat or single curvature.  If
the sheet cannot be made to conform to the
surface without wrinkling, the surface is of
double curvature.
1-49. REPAIRS TO SINGLE CURVA-
TURE PLYWOOD SKIN.  Repairs to single
curvature plywood skin may usually be formed
from flat plywood, either by bending it dry or
after soaking it in hot water.  The degree of
curvature to which a piece of plywood can be
bent will depend upon the direction of the
grain and the thickness.  Table 1-2 is a guide

--- PAGE 55 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-49
Page 1-21
1.
AFTER INSERTED WEB HAS BEEN BONDED IN PLACE, BOND COVER STRIPS OVER ENTIRE LENGTH OF
WEB SPLICE JOINTS.
2.
SECTIONAL SHAPE OF FILLER BLOCKS MUST CONFORM EXACTLY TO TAPER OF SPAR.  THEY MUST
NOT BE TOO TIGHTLY FITTED, FOR WEDGING ACTION WILL LOOSEN EXISTING BONDS OF WEBS TO
FLANGES.  IF TOO LOOSELY FITTED, CRUSHING OF WEB WILL OCCUR WHEN CLAMPING.
3.
DIRECTION OF FACE GRAIN OF INSERTED WEB SECTION AND COVER STRIPS TO BE SAME AS
ORIGINAL WEB.
FIGURE 1-9. Method of splicing box spar webs.

--- PAGE 56 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-22
Par 1-49
FIGURE 1-10. Method of reinforcing a longitudinal crack and/or local damage in a solid spar.
for determining which process of bending
should be used for the curvature being consid-
ered.
a. Plywood, after softening, may be bent
on a cold ventilated form, or it may be bent
over the leading edge near the area being
patched if space permits.  In either method the
repair part should be allowed to dry completely
on the form.  When bending plywood over a
leading edge, drying may be hastened by lay-
ing a piece of coarse burlap over the leading
edge before using it as a bending form.  To
speed drying, a fan may be used to circulate air
around the repair part.
b. In bending pieces of small radii or to
speed up the bending of a large number of
parts of the same curvature, it may be neces-
sary to use a heated bending form.  The surface
temperature of this form may be as high as
149 °C (300 F), if necessary, without danger
of damage to the plywood.  The plywood
should be left on the heated form only long
enough to dry to room conditions.
1-50. REPAIRS TO DOUBLE CURVA-
TURE PLYWOOD SKIN.  The molded ply-
wood necessary for a repair to a damaged ply-
wood skin of double curvature cannot be made
from flat plywood unless the area to be re-
paired is very small or is of exceedingly slight
double curvature; therefore, molded plywood
of the proper curvature must be on hand before
the repair can be made.  If molded plywood of
the proper curvature is available, the repair
may be made using the same procedure as on
single curvature skins.

--- PAGE 57 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-50
Page 1-23
FIGURE 1-11. Repair of wood ribs.

--- PAGE 58 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-24
Par 1-50
FIGURE 1-12. Typical wing compression rib repairs.

--- PAGE 59 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-50
Page 1-25
TABLE 1-2. Minimum recommended bend radii for aircraft plywood.
10 PERCENT MOISTURE
CONTENT, BENT ON COLD
MANDRELS
THOROUGHLY SOAKED IN HOT
WATER AND BENT ON COLD
MANDRELS
PLYWOOD
CHARACTERISTICS
AT 90 TO
AT 0 OR  45
FACE GRAIN 
TO  FACE 
GRAIN
AT 90 TO 
AT 00R 45°
FACE GRAIN 
TO  FACE 
GRAIN
THICKNESS
(INCHES)
NUMBER
OF PLIES
MINIMUM BEND RADIUS (INCHES)
.035
3
2.0
1.1
0.5
0.1
.070
3
5.2
3.2
1.5
0.4
.100
3
8.6
5.2
2.6
0.8
.125
3
12
7.1
3.8
1.2
.155
3
16
10
5.3
1.8
.185
3
20
13
7.1
2.6
.160
5
17
11
 6
 2
.190
5
21
14
 7
 3
.225
5
27
17
10
 4
.250
5
31
20
12
 5
.315
5
43
28
16
 7
.375
5
54
36
21
10
1-51. TYPES OF PATCHES.  There are
four types of patches: splayed patch, surface
(or overlay) patch, scarf patch, and plug patch.
They are all acceptable for repairing plywood
skins.
a. Splayed Patch.  Small holes with their
largest dimensions not over 15 times the skin
thickness, in skins not more than 1/10 inch in
thickness, may be repaired by using a circular
splayed patch as illustrated in figure 1-13.  The
term “splayed” is used to denote that the edges
of the patch are tapered, but the slope is
steeper than is allowed in scarfing operations.
(1) Lay out the patch according to fig-
ure 1-13.  Tack a small piece of plywood over
the hole for a center point and draw two circles
with a divider, the inner circle to be the size of
the hole and the outer circle marking the limits
of the taper.  The difference between the radii
is 5T (5 times the thickness of the skin).  If one
leg of the dividers has been sharpened to a
chisel edge, the dividers may be used to cut the
inner circle.
(2) Taper the hole evenly to the outer
mark with a chisel, knife, or rasp.
(3) Prepare a circular tapered patch to
fit the prepared hole, and bond the patch into
place with face-grain direction matching that
of the original surface.
(4) Use waxed paper or plastic wrap,
(cut larger than the size of the patch) between
the patch and the plywood pressure plate.  This
prevents excess adhesive from bonding the
pressure plate to the skin.  Center the pressure
plate carefully over the patch.

--- PAGE 60 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-26
Par 1-51
(5) As there is no reinforcement behind
this patch, care must be used so that pressure is
not great enough to crack the skin.  On hori-
zontal surfaces, weights or sandbags will be
sufficient.  On patches too far from any edge
for the use of standard hand clamps, jaws of
greater length may be improvised.  Table 1-2,
columns (1) and (3), may also be used for de-
termining the maximum thickness of single
laminations for curved members.
(6) Fill, sand, and refinish the patch.
b. Surface Patch.  Plywood skins that are
damaged between or along framing members
may be repaired by surface or overlay patches
as shown in figure 1-14.  Surface patches lo-
cated entirely aft of the 10 percent chord line,
or which wrap around the leading edge and
terminate aft of the 10 percent chord line, are
permissible.  Surface patches may have as
much as a 50  inch perimeter and may cover as
much as 1 frame (or rib) space.  Trim the dam-
aged skin to a rectangular or triangular shape
and round the corners.  The radius of rounded
corners must be at least 5 times the skin thick-
ness.  Bevel the forward edges of patches lo-
cated entirely aft of the 10 percent chord line
to 4 times the skin thickness.  The face-grain
direction must be the same as the original skin.
Cover completed surface patches with fabric to
match surrounding area.  The fabric must
overlap the original fabric at least 2 inches.
c. Scarf Patch.  A properly prepared and
inserted scarf patch is the best repair for dam-
aged plywood skins and is preferred for most
skin repairs.  Figure 1-15 shows the details and
dimensions to be used when installing typical
scarf skin patches, when the back of the skin is
accessible.  Follow figure 1-16 when the back
of the skin is not accessible.  The scarf slope
of 1 in 12, shown in both figures, is the steep-
est slope permitted for all kinds of plywood.  If
the radius of curvature of the skin at all points
on the trimmed opening is greater than
100 times the skin thickness, a scarf patch may
be installed.
(1) Scarf cuts in plywood may be made
by hand plane, spoke shave, scraper, or accu-
rate sandpaper block.  Rasped surfaces, except
at the corners of scarf patches and sawn sur-
faces, are not recommended as they are likely
to be rough or inaccurate.
(2) Nail strip or small screw clamping
is often the only method available for bonding
scarf joints in plywood skin repairs.  It is es-
sential that all scarf joints in plywood be
backed with plywood or solid wood to provide
adequate nail holding capacity.  The face-grain
direction of the plywood patch must be the
same as that of the original skin.
(3) If the back of a damaged plywood
skin is accessible (such as a fuselage skin), it
should be repaired with a scarf patch, follow-
ing the details shown in figure 1-15.  When-
ever possible, the edges of the patch should be
supported as shown in section C-C of fig-
ure 1-15.  When the damage follows or ex-
tends to a framing member, the scarf may be
supported as shown in section B-B of fig-
ure 1-15.  Damages that do not exceed
25 times the skin thickness in diameter after
being trimmed to a circular shape and are not
less than 15 times the skin thickness to a
framing member, may be repaired as shown in
figure 1-15, section D-D.
(a) The backing block is carefully
shaped from solid wood and fitted to the inside
surface of the skin, and is temporarily held in
place with nails.
(b) Use waxed paper or plastic wrap
to prevent bonding of the backing block to the
skin.

--- PAGE 61 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-51
Page 1-27
FIGURE 1-13. Splayed patch.
(c) A hole, the exact size of the in-
side circle of the scarf patch, is made in the
block, and is centered over the trimmed area of
damage.
(d) The block is removed, after the
adhesive on the patch has set, leaving a flush
surface to the repaired skin.
(4) Steps in making a scarf patch when
the back of the skin is not accessible are as
follows:
(a) After removing damaged sec-
tions, install backing strips, as shown in fig-
ure 1-16, along all edges that are not fully
backed by a rib or a spar.  To prevent warping
of the skin, backing strips should be made of a
soft-textured plywood, such as yellow poplar
or spruce rather than solid wood.  All junctions
between backing strips and ribs or spars should
have the end of the backing strip supported by
a saddle gusset of plywood.
(b) If needed, nail and bond the new
gusset plate to rib.  It may be necessary to
remove and replace the old gusset plate with a
new saddle gusset, or it may be necessary to
nail a saddle gusset over the original gusset.
(c) Attach nailing strips to hold
backing strips in place while the adhesive sets.
Use a bucking bar, where necessary, to provide
support for nailing.  After the backing strips
are fully bonded, install the patch.
d. Plug Patch.  Either oval or round plug
patches may be used on plywood skins pro-
vided the damage can be covered by the
patches whose dimensions are given in fig-
ure 1-17 and figure 1-18.  The plug patch is
strictly a skin repair, and should be used only
for damage that does not involve the support-
ing structure under the skin.  The face-grain di-
rection of the finished patch must match the
surrounding skin.
(1) Steps in making an oval plug patch
are as follows:
(a) Explore the area about the hole to
be sure it lies at least the width of the oval

--- PAGE 62 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-28
Par 1-51
FIGURE 1-14. Surface patches.

--- PAGE 63 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-51
Page 1-29
FIGURE 1-15. Scarf patches (back of skin accessible).

--- PAGE 64 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-30
Par 1-51
FIGURE 1-16. Scarf patches (back of skin not accessible).

--- PAGE 65 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-51
Page 1-31
doubler from a rib or a spar.  Refer to fig-
ure 1-17 for repair details.
(b) Prepare a patch and a doubler of
the same species plywood as the surrounding
skin using the dimensions shown in fig-
ure 1-17.
(c) Lay the oval plug patch over the
damage and trace the patch onto the skin.  Saw
to the line, and trim the hole edges with a knife
and sandpaper.
(d) Mark the exact size of the patch
on one surface of the oval doubler and apply
adhesive to the area outside the line.  Insert
doubler through the hole and bring it, adhesive
side up, to the underside of the skin with the
pencil outline of the patch matching the edges
of the hole.  If the curvature of the surface to
be repaired is greater than a rise of 1/8 inch in
6 inches, the doubler should be preformed by
hot water or steam bending to the approximate
curvature.  As an alternative to preforming of
the 1/4 inch stock, the doubler may be lami-
nated from two thicknesses of 1/8 inch ply.
(e) Apply nailing strips outlining the
hole to apply bonding pressure between dou-
bler and skin.  Use a bucking bar to provide
support for nailing.  When two rows of nails
are used, stagger nail spacing.  Allow adhesive
to cure.
(f) Apply adhesive to remaining sur-
face of the doubler and to the mating surface
on the patch.  Lay the patch in position over
the doubler, and screw the pressure plate to the
patch assembly using a small nail to line up the
holes that have been previously made with
patch and plate matching.  No. 4 round head
screws are used.  Lead holes in the plywood
doubler are not necessary.  Waxed paper or
plastic wrap between the plate and patch pre-
vents adhesive from bonding the plate to the
patch.  No clamps or further pressure need be
applied, as the nailing strips and screws exert
ample pressure.
(2) Round plug patches may be made
by following the steps in figure 1-18.  The
steps are identical to those for making the oval
patch except for the insertion of the doubler.
In using the round patch, where access is from
only one side, the round doubler cannot be in-
serted unless it has been split.
1-52. FABRIC PATCH.  Small holes not
exceeding 1 inch in diameter, after being
trimmed to a smooth outline, may be repaired
by doping a fabric patch on the outside of the
plywood skin.  The edges of the trimmed hole
should first be sealed, and the fabric patch
should overlap the plywood skin by at least
1 inch.  Holes nearer than 1 inch to any frame
member, or in the leading edge or frontal area
of the fuselage, should not be repaired with
fabric patches.

--- PAGE 66 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-32
Par 1-52
FIGURE 1-17. Oval plug patch assembly.

--- PAGE 67 ---
9/27/01
AC 43.13-1B CHG 1
Par 1-52
Page 1-33 (and 1-34)
DIMENSIONS
A
B
C
SMALL CIRCULAR PLUG PATCH
2 5/8
2
1 3/8
LARGE CIRCULAR PLUG PATCH
3 7/8
3
2 1/8
(TWO ROWS OF SCREWS AND NAILS REQUIRED
FOR LARGE PATCH)
FIGURE 1-18. Round plug patch assembly.
1-53.1-63. [RESERVED.]

--- PAGE 68 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-50
Page 1-25
TABLE 1-2. Minimum recommended bend radii for aircraft plywood.
10 PERCENT MOISTURE
CONTENT, BENT ON COLD
MANDRELS
THOROUGHLY SOAKED IN HOT
WATER AND BENT ON COLD
MANDRELS
PLYWOOD
CHARACTERISTICS
AT 90 TO
AT 0 OR  45
FACE GRAIN 
TO  FACE 
GRAIN
AT 90 TO 
AT 00R 45°
FACE GRAIN 
TO  FACE 
GRAIN
THICKNESS
(INCHES)
NUMBER
OF PLIES
MINIMUM BEND RADIUS (INCHES)
.035
3
2.0
1.1
0.5
0.1
.070
3
5.2
3.2
1.5
0.4
.100
3
8.6
5.2
2.6
0.8
.125
3
12
7.1
3.8
1.2
.155
3
16
10
5.3
1.8
.185
3
20
13
7.1
2.6
.160
5
17
11
 6
 2
.190
5
21
14
 7
 3
.225
5
27
17
10
 4
.250
5
31
20
12
 5
.315
5
43
28
16
 7
.375
5
54
36
21
10
1-51. TYPES OF PATCHES.  There are
four types of patches: splayed patch, surface
(or overlay) patch, scarf patch, and plug patch.
They are all acceptable for repairing plywood
skins.
a. Splayed Patch.  Small holes with their
largest dimensions not over 15 times the skin
thickness, in skins not more than 1/10 inch in
thickness, may be repaired by using a circular
splayed patch as illustrated in figure 1-13.  The
term “splayed” is used to denote that the edges
of the patch are tapered, but the slope is
steeper than is allowed in scarfing operations.
(1) Lay out the patch according to fig-
ure 1-13.  Tack a small piece of plywood over
the hole for a center point and draw two circles
with a divider, the inner circle to be the size of
the hole and the outer circle marking the limits
of the taper.  The difference between the radii
is 5T (5 times the thickness of the skin).  If one
leg of the dividers has been sharpened to a
chisel edge, the dividers may be used to cut the
inner circle.
(2) Taper the hole evenly to the outer
mark with a chisel, knife, or rasp.
(3) Prepare a circular tapered patch to
fit the prepared hole, and bond the patch into
place with face-grain direction matching that
of the original surface.
(4) Use waxed paper or plastic wrap,
(cut larger than the size of the patch) between
the patch and the plywood pressure plate.  This
prevents excess adhesive from bonding the
pressure plate to the skin.  Center the pressure
plate carefully over the patch.

--- PAGE 69 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-26
Par 1-51
(5) As there is no reinforcement behind
this patch, care must be used so that pressure is
not great enough to crack the skin.  On hori-
zontal surfaces, weights or sandbags will be
sufficient.  On patches too far from any edge
for the use of standard hand clamps, jaws of
greater length may be improvised.  Table 1-2,
columns (1) and (3), may also be used for de-
termining the maximum thickness of single
laminations for curved members.
(6) Fill, sand, and refinish the patch.
b. Surface Patch.  Plywood skins that are
damaged between or along framing members
may be repaired by surface or overlay patches
as shown in figure 1-14.  Surface patches lo-
cated entirely aft of the 10 percent chord line,
or which wrap around the leading edge and
terminate aft of the 10 percent chord line, are
permissible.  Surface patches may have as
much as a 50  inch perimeter and may cover as
much as 1 frame (or rib) space.  Trim the dam-
aged skin to a rectangular or triangular shape
and round the corners.  The radius of rounded
corners must be at least 5 times the skin thick-
ness.  Bevel the forward edges of patches lo-
cated entirely aft of the 10 percent chord line
to 4 times the skin thickness.  The face-grain
direction must be the same as the original skin.
Cover completed surface patches with fabric to
match surrounding area.  The fabric must
overlap the original fabric at least 2 inches.
c. Scarf Patch.  A properly prepared and
inserted scarf patch is the best repair for dam-
aged plywood skins and is preferred for most
skin repairs.  Figure 1-15 shows the details and
dimensions to be used when installing typical
scarf skin patches, when the back of the skin is
accessible.  Follow figure 1-16 when the back
of the skin is not accessible.  The scarf slope
of 1 in 12, shown in both figures, is the steep-
est slope permitted for all kinds of plywood.  If
the radius of curvature of the skin at all points
on the trimmed opening is greater than
100 times the skin thickness, a scarf patch may
be installed.
(1) Scarf cuts in plywood may be made
by hand plane, spoke shave, scraper, or accu-
rate sandpaper block.  Rasped surfaces, except
at the corners of scarf patches and sawn sur-
faces, are not recommended as they are likely
to be rough or inaccurate.
(2) Nail strip or small screw clamping
is often the only method available for bonding
scarf joints in plywood skin repairs.  It is es-
sential that all scarf joints in plywood be
backed with plywood or solid wood to provide
adequate nail holding capacity.  The face-grain
direction of the plywood patch must be the
same as that of the original skin.
(3) If the back of a damaged plywood
skin is accessible (such as a fuselage skin), it
should be repaired with a scarf patch, follow-
ing the details shown in figure 1-15.  When-
ever possible, the edges of the patch should be
supported as shown in section C-C of fig-
ure 1-15.  When the damage follows or ex-
tends to a framing member, the scarf may be
supported as shown in section B-B of fig-
ure 1-15.  Damages that do not exceed
25 times the skin thickness in diameter after
being trimmed to a circular shape and are not
less than 15 times the skin thickness to a
framing member, may be repaired as shown in
figure 1-15, section D-D.
(a) The backing block is carefully
shaped from solid wood and fitted to the inside
surface of the skin, and is temporarily held in
place with nails.
(b) Use waxed paper or plastic wrap
to prevent bonding of the backing block to the
skin.

--- PAGE 70 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-51
Page 1-27
FIGURE 1-13. Splayed patch.
(c) A hole, the exact size of the in-
side circle of the scarf patch, is made in the
block, and is centered over the trimmed area of
damage.
(d) The block is removed, after the
adhesive on the patch has set, leaving a flush
surface to the repaired skin.
(4) Steps in making a scarf patch when
the back of the skin is not accessible are as
follows:
(a) After removing damaged sec-
tions, install backing strips, as shown in fig-
ure 1-16, along all edges that are not fully
backed by a rib or a spar.  To prevent warping
of the skin, backing strips should be made of a
soft-textured plywood, such as yellow poplar
or spruce rather than solid wood.  All junctions
between backing strips and ribs or spars should
have the end of the backing strip supported by
a saddle gusset of plywood.
(b) If needed, nail and bond the new
gusset plate to rib.  It may be necessary to
remove and replace the old gusset plate with a
new saddle gusset, or it may be necessary to
nail a saddle gusset over the original gusset.
(c) Attach nailing strips to hold
backing strips in place while the adhesive sets.
Use a bucking bar, where necessary, to provide
support for nailing.  After the backing strips
are fully bonded, install the patch.
d. Plug Patch.  Either oval or round plug
patches may be used on plywood skins pro-
vided the damage can be covered by the
patches whose dimensions are given in fig-
ure 1-17 and figure 1-18.  The plug patch is
strictly a skin repair, and should be used only
for damage that does not involve the support-
ing structure under the skin.  The face-grain di-
rection of the finished patch must match the
surrounding skin.
(1) Steps in making an oval plug patch
are as follows:
(a) Explore the area about the hole to
be sure it lies at least the width of the oval

--- PAGE 71 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-28
Par 1-51
FIGURE 1-14. Surface patches.

--- PAGE 72 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-51
Page 1-29
FIGURE 1-15. Scarf patches (back of skin accessible).

--- PAGE 73 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-30
Par 1-51
FIGURE 1-16. Scarf patches (back of skin not accessible).

--- PAGE 74 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-51
Page 1-31
doubler from a rib or a spar.  Refer to fig-
ure 1-17 for repair details.
(b) Prepare a patch and a doubler of
the same species plywood as the surrounding
skin using the dimensions shown in fig-
ure 1-17.
(c) Lay the oval plug patch over the
damage and trace the patch onto the skin.  Saw
to the line, and trim the hole edges with a knife
and sandpaper.
(d) Mark the exact size of the patch
on one surface of the oval doubler and apply
adhesive to the area outside the line.  Insert
doubler through the hole and bring it, adhesive
side up, to the underside of the skin with the
pencil outline of the patch matching the edges
of the hole.  If the curvature of the surface to
be repaired is greater than a rise of 1/8 inch in
6 inches, the doubler should be preformed by
hot water or steam bending to the approximate
curvature.  As an alternative to preforming of
the 1/4 inch stock, the doubler may be lami-
nated from two thicknesses of 1/8 inch ply.
(e) Apply nailing strips outlining the
hole to apply bonding pressure between dou-
bler and skin.  Use a bucking bar to provide
support for nailing.  When two rows of nails
are used, stagger nail spacing.  Allow adhesive
to cure.
(f) Apply adhesive to remaining sur-
face of the doubler and to the mating surface
on the patch.  Lay the patch in position over
the doubler, and screw the pressure plate to the
patch assembly using a small nail to line up the
holes that have been previously made with
patch and plate matching.  No. 4 round head
screws are used.  Lead holes in the plywood
doubler are not necessary.  Waxed paper or
plastic wrap between the plate and patch pre-
vents adhesive from bonding the plate to the
patch.  No clamps or further pressure need be
applied, as the nailing strips and screws exert
ample pressure.
(2) Round plug patches may be made
by following the steps in figure 1-18.  The
steps are identical to those for making the oval
patch except for the insertion of the doubler.
In using the round patch, where access is from
only one side, the round doubler cannot be in-
serted unless it has been split.
1-52. FABRIC PATCH.  Small holes not
exceeding 1 inch in diameter, after being
trimmed to a smooth outline, may be repaired
by doping a fabric patch on the outside of the
plywood skin.  The edges of the trimmed hole
should first be sealed, and the fabric patch
should overlap the plywood skin by at least
1 inch.  Holes nearer than 1 inch to any frame
member, or in the leading edge or frontal area
of the fuselage, should not be repaired with
fabric patches.

--- PAGE 75 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-32
Par 1-52
FIGURE 1-17. Oval plug patch assembly.

--- PAGE 76 ---
9/27/01
AC 43.13-1B CHG 1
Par 1-52
Page 1-33 (and 1-34)
DIMENSIONS
A
B
C
SMALL CIRCULAR PLUG PATCH
2 5/8
2
1 3/8
LARGE CIRCULAR PLUG PATCH
3 7/8
3
2 1/8
(TWO ROWS OF SCREWS AND NAILS REQUIRED
FOR LARGE PATCH)
FIGURE 1-18. Round plug patch assembly.
1-53.1-63. [RESERVED.]

--- PAGE 77 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-64 
Page 1-35
SECTION 5.  FINISHING WOOD STRUCTURES
1-64. GENERAL.  Any repair to spars, ribs,
skin surfaces, or other structural parts of the
airframe involves finishing as the final step of
the job.  The surface finish is the final line of
defense to prevent the destructive effects of
moisture entry into the structure.  The time and
effort spent during the preparatory phase of the
refinishing process will be reflected in the ap-
pearance and longevity of the finished surface.
Adherence to the instructions issued by the
finish manufacturer is necessary to obtain the
appearance desired and protective characteris-
tics for the product used.  The primary objec-
tive of interior finishes is to afford protection
of the wood against serious change in moisture
content when exposed to damp air or to water
that gains entrance to closed spaces by conden-
sation or by penetration of rain, mist, or fog.
Coatings, on contact areas between wood and
metal protect the metal against corrosion from
moisture in the wood.  The primary objectives
of the exterior finish are to protect the wood
against weathering, provide a suitable appear-
ance, and present a smooth surface in flight.
1-65. ACCEPTABLE FINISHES.  Any
varnish conforming to Federal Specification
TT-V-109, as amended, or other coating ap-
proved by the airframe manufacturer or the
FAA is acceptable.  Exterior surfaces must be
further protected from the effects of abrasion,
weather, and sunlight.  A number of systems
for exterior finishing have STC approval and
are manufactured under a PMA.  (See Chap-
ter 2, Fabric Covering.)  Low viscosity epoxy
adhesive (meeting the requirements of para-
graph 1-4 for that purpose) may be used as an
internal surface finish when subsequent bond-
ing is necessary.
1-66. PRECAUTIONS.
a. When making repairs, avoid exces-
sive contamination of surfaces with adhesive
squeeze-out at joints and on all surfaces.  Ex-
cess adhesive should always be removed be-
fore applying finish.  Because many paints and
adhesives are incompatible, even a slight
amount of adhesive underneath the finish may
cause premature deterioration of the finish.
b. Soiling substances, such as oil and
grease, should be removed as completely as
possible.  Naphtha may be used to remove sur-
face deposits of oil and grease; however,
thinned residue may penetrate into any unpro-
tected wood.  In areas where minor amounts of
oil or grease have penetrated the wood surface,
removal may be accomplished by use of an ab-
sorbent type of cleaner such as gunsmith's
whiting or a clothing spot lifter such as K2r.
Marks that are made by grease pencils or lum-
ber crayons containing wax are harmful and
should be removed, but marks made by ordi-
nary soft graphite pencils and nonoily stamp
pad inks may be safely finished over.  All dust,
dirt, and other solid particles should be
removed.
c. Sawdust, shavings, and chips must be
removed from enclosed spaces before they are
sealed off by replacement of skin.  A vacuum
cleaner is useful for such cleaning.
d. Since most adhesives will not bond
satisfactorily to sealers, it is necessary to avoid
applying sealer over the areas where adhesive
will be applied.  Mark off areas to receive ad-
hesive, and allow an additional 1/4 inch on
each side of the adhesive area to provide for

--- PAGE 78 ---
AC 43.13-1B
9/8/98
Page 1-36
Par 1-66
misalignment when mating the parts.  It is
preferable to leave some unsealed areas rather
than risk weakening the joint by accidental
overlap of the sealer into the bonded areas.
Wherever possible, apply sealer to the margins
after the adhesive has cured.  As an example,
the lower skin of a wing bay would be in-
stalled first, leaving access from above to ap-
ply sealer.  All low spots (where moisture
would collect) are well sealed.  The top skin
would be installed last, so that the only un-
sealed margins would be on upper surfaces
where moisture is least likely to collect.
e. An alternative to the previous para-
graph is to use an approved epoxy coating and
compatible epoxy adhesive.  Apply the coat-
ing, allowing 1/4 inch margins as in the previ-
ous paragraph.  After the coating has cured,
apply epoxy adhesive to joint surfaces, and
overlap the adhesive onto the sealer.  Close
joint and clamp.  The epoxy adhesive will
bond satisfactorily to the coating and ensure a
complete coverage of the wood surfaces.  Use
only approved and compatible adhesives and
coatings for this method.
1-67. FINISHING OF INTERIOR SUR-
FACES.  Finish repaired ribs, spars, interior of
plywood skin, and other internal members, in-
cluding areas of contact between metal and
wood, by applying one thinned coat (for pene-
tration into wood grain) of varnish or other ac-
ceptable finish, followed by two full coats.
Protect built-up box spars and similar closed
structures on the interior in the same way.
Where better protection is required, as on the
surfaces of wheel wells and the bottoms of
hulls below the floor boards, an additional coat
of aluminized sealer consisting of 12 to
16 ounces of aluminum paste per gallon of
sealer, may be applied.
1-68. FINISHING OF EXTERIOR SUR-
FACES.  Exterior surfaces require more pro-
tection than interior areas due to the effects of
abrasion, weather, and sunlight.  (See chap-
ter 2.)  Tests have shown that the interior tem-
perature of wooden aircraft structures can
reach 185 F when the aircraft is finished in a
dark color and parked outdoors on a hot, still
day.  Exposure to prolonged high temperature
is detrimental to wood, adhesives, and finishes.
Wood loses approximately 25 percent of its
strength at 125 F.  For this reason, the me-
chanic should consider temperature effects
when selecting finish colors or looking for ar-
eas of likely deterioration.  The lowest tem-
peratures are found when the aircraft is fin-
ished in white or very light colors, while
darker colors produce higher temperatures.  A
general trend toward higher temperatures may
be seen when exterior colors are yellow, pink,
light blue, aluminum, purple, blue, light green,
orange, tan, red, green, brown, and black.  A
lighter shade of a particular color helps to re-
duce temperatures.
1-69. FINISHING OF END GRAIN SUR-
FACES.  End grain portions of wooden mem-
bers are much more absorbent than side grain.
Because of this extreme vulnerability to mois-
ture entry, it is necessary to take extra precau-
tions to seal end grain.
a. Apply at least one thinned coat of ac-
ceptable sealer to ensure maximum penetra-
tion, and then follow with as many full
strength coats as necessary to achieve a
smooth, glossy coating.  Depending on the
type wood to be finished, two to four full coats
will be required.  A final coat of aluminized
varnish may be applied to end grain surfaces.
If the surfaces are to be finished with dope or
lacquer, a dope-proof sealer, similar to Federal
Specification TT-V-109, or epoxy sealer
should be used.
b. Exposed end grain includes such sur-
faces as spar butts, skin edges, areas around
vent holes, inspection holes, fittings, and ex-
posed scarfed or tapered surfaces.

--- PAGE 79 ---
9/8/98
AC 43.13-1B
Par 1-70
Page 1-37 (and 1-38)
1-70. FINISHING WITH FABRIC OR
TAPE.  A number of systems for exterior fin-
ishing have STC approval and are manufac-
tured under a PMA.  Follow the product manu-
facturer's instructions for the system used.
a. If the finish surrounding the repair is
a traditional dope system, seal the wood grain
with a suitable solvent resistant one-part var-
nish, commonly described as “dope proof,” or
a two-part epoxy varnish.  Follow with two
coats of clear dope, and allow sufficient drying
time between coats.
b. Apply a third coat of clear dope and
lay a piece of pinked-edge airplane cloth into
the wet film.  All air bubbles should be worked
out by brushing to ensure maximum adhesion.
When dry, apply one brush coat, to ensure
proper penetration, and at least one spray coat
of clear dope.  The dried spray coat may be
sanded with fine sandpaper to obtain a
smoother finish.  Complete the refinishing of
the surface by application of a topcoat as re-
quired to match the adjacent area.
1-71. SEALING OF BOLT HOLES.  Bolt
holes in wooden structure provide a vulnerable
entry point for moisture.  Variations in mois-
ture content around bolt holes can lead to de-
cay or splitting.  In addition, excessive mois-
ture at bolt holes promotes corrosion of the
bolts.  Sealing of the wood surfaces in bolt
holes can be accomplished by application of
varnish or other acceptable sealer into the open
hole.  The sealer must be allowed to dry or
cure thoroughly prior to bolt installation.
1-72.1-79. [RESERVED.]