ll of the tow hook, yaw got to 
about 90° and the aircraft became airborne, side- 
ways. Rotation continued and the tail came up so 
that the machine finally hit the ground in a vertical 
nose-down position travelling bottom side first. The 
cockpit was smashed, the fuselage was in at least 
two pieces and one wing was reduced to match- 
wood. The rest wasn't in very good shape either.
The pilot was unhurt but very much chastened. 
Brennig James bought the wreck from the insurance 
company and gave it to the ATC, but it was not consid- 
ered worth repairing.
Had Slingsby been able to develop the Gull 2 in 1945, 
he could have corrected its faults and might have mar- 
keted a two-seater with a performance in advance of 
anything available elsewhere. He evidently did con- 
sider the possibility of building a new prototype. A soli- 
tary sketch plan for a new version Gull 2 was found in 
the factory archives. It showed a redesigned fuselage, 
lengthened, with greatly enlarged vertical tail areas 
and a simpler, stepped type of transparent cockpit 
canopy instead of the contoured, built-up Plexiglas 
panelled type. There would have been large airbrakes, 
opening above and below the wing, similar to those
that were subsequently used for the Slingsby T-34 Sky. 
The flaps were retained, and also the very long ailerons 
of the original prototype before modification. Slingsby 
must have decided that it would not have succeeded in 
repaying the necessary investment and abandoned the 
project.
Gull 2 data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Wing sections:
Root
Mid-span
Tip 
Length o.a.
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
19.91m (65.33ft) 
21.74m2 (234ft2) 
18.23
NACA4421 
NACA4418 
NACARAF.34
7.70m (21.98ft)
293.5kg (6511b) 
458.6kg (1,01 lib) 
21.0kg/m2 (4.31b/ft2)
Performance
Best glide ratio (estimate) 27:1
The Gull 2 nearing completion. Fred Slingsby (right) and an 
unknown assistant check the controls. Note the 'butterfly' 
type canopy. In the background are the A frame and wings of 
a Slingsby primary glider bearing the old golden eagle trade 
mark. (Slingsby collection)

--- PAGE 99 ---
The Gull 2 on aero-tow in 1957, before competing in the 
National Championships. The enlarged fin is well shown 
here, and a trim tab has been added to the elevator. This 
was probably not adjustable in flight. The tow release is on
the belly of the aircraft. A small castering tail-wheel has been 
added. This also reduced the ground angle, assisting lateral 
control in the early stages of a take-off run. (Charles E. 
Brown, RAF Museum, Hendon, neg No. 6712-8)
Although this photograph is rather dark, the short ailerons 
and the flaps may be seen. (Charles E. Brown, RAF 
Museum, Hendon, neg No. 6712-12)
The Gull 2 fuselage outside the workshop, showing a wing 
root template clipped temporarily in place. 
(Slingsby collection)
A photograph of unknown origin, but probably showing 
preparations for a test flight about 1952. The long tube may 
have been used to suspend a static bomb below the fuse­ 
lage when in flight, to check the position error of the air 
speed indicator. Note the 'Ottfur' aero-tow release. Later 
photographs show this taped over, with the towline attached 
to the belly hook.
r

--- PAGE 100 ---
Air brake operation
Root wing section 
NACA2415
Tip wing section 
NACA4412
Hengist 3 
nose
Flap bellows operation
Slingsby
Type 18
Hengist
Drawn by Martin Simons 1994

--- PAGE 101 ---
Type 18, Hengist
At the outbreak of the Second World War, Slingsby was 
in process of shifting his works from the premises in 
Kirbymoorside village to a new factory off Ings Lane, a 
short distance to the south. Major J. E. D. Shaw, who 
had encouraged and helped the previous relocation to 
Kirbymoorside from Scarborough, underwrote the 
move, and the company was reorganised with 
increased capital. It seemed the wrong time for such a 
costly expansion. The outbreak of war brought civilian 
flying to a standstill, and the orderbooks emptied over- 
night. The Gull 2 was completed but immediately put 
into storage. Slingsby's Type 16 was never built. It was 
an interesting project for a small sailplane using the 
outer wings of the two-seat Gull 2 adapted to fit the 
fuselage of the Kite 1 and the tailplane of the Gull 1. 
Nothing beyond a speculative general-arrangement 
drawing was ever done. A subcontract for rudders for 
Avro Ansons kept the factory going, and a little work 
was done preparing gliders for radar trials on the south 
coast of England.
Exactly when the idea of using gliders to carry 
troops into battle originated, and who thought of it, is 
not really known. There is a tradition that, when 
passing through Munich airport in 1934, Adolf Hitler 
saw the huge Obs meteorological research sailplane 
and inspected it. Hitler was in Munich for a political 
meeting, the Obs for a meteorological conference. The 
glider spanned 26m (85ft) and could carry three people 
and a large quantity of meteorological instruments. 
Very possibly the almighty Fiihrer made some remark 
or asked a question about the possibilities of using 
such aircraft in war. Early warnings of aircraft 
approaching at that time relied on sound detectors and 
eyesight. Neither was dependable and a glider, or a 
whole fleet of them, might arrive silently at a chosen 
objective in the early hours of dawn and deploy troops 
before the enemy even knew an attack was imminent. 
If Hitler said anything of the kind, his minions might 
have felt obliged to take it seriously. Ernst Udet, too, is 
credited with the original suggestion that the Obs 
could be adapted for carrying soldiers on secret sur- 
prise attacks. Certainly Kurt Student, who eventually
became commander of German airborne forces, saw 
military transport gliders in the USSR in 1936 and 
remembered them when he needed vehicles capable of 
delivering heavy equipment and troops into action. 
The soldiers would arrive in the gliders with their 
commanders in organised groups and have heavy 
equipment immediately available, rather than being 
scattered individually by parachute over large areas 
and having to find a rendezvous, then locate and 
unpack containers which might be equally scattered or 
even lost,
Whatever the origins of the idea, by 1937 the German 
military command had a prototype glider, the DPS 230, 
capable of carrying nine fully-equipped soldiers. After 
extensive tests by Student and his men it was secretly 
put into large-scale production in 1939. On 10 May 1940 
a highly successful early dawn attack by gliders on 
Fort Eben Emael and bridges nearby in Belgium 
shocked military minds all over the world. In Britain, 
as in the USA and other countries, glider forces were 
planned and specifications for suitable aircraft were 
drafted.
Slingsby became involved immediately, and ten- 
dered an outline design, the Type 17, in response to the 
first Air Ministry specification for an eight-seat troop 
carrying glider. It had a cantilever gull wing of 21.34m 
(70ft) span. The official requirement at this time was 
for a glider that would be towed to a great height to 
make a long, silent approach to an objective, relying on 
surprise for success. The Slingsby design was not 
accepted, the General Aircraft Hotspur being approved 
instead. The Kirbymoorside factory built 13 Hotspurs 
under contract.
A new specification, X. 25/40, was issued very soon 
afterwards. This called for a larger glider capable of 
carrying 15 fully armed paratroops, the intention now 
being that the gliders would be towed in pairs for the 
soldiers to jump from them over their target, the 
gliders then being towed home again. Slingsby 
responded promptly. A mock-up of the design was 
ready for inspection by 22 January 1941. Construction 
of the prototype began, and it was completed 12
99

--- PAGE 102 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
months later to fly at Dishforth, towed by an 
Armstrong \\Tiitworth Whitley bomber.
The Hengist, as it was called, was by far the largest 
aircraft built at Kirbymoorside, with a span of 24.3m 
(80ft) and an empty weight of 2,104kg (4,6291b). The 
wing was a simple tapered form with the NACA 2415 
profile at the root and 4412 at the tip. For approach 
control, split trailing-edge flaps and airbrakes on the 
upper side of the wing were fitted. Both were of 
unusual design. Rather than simple hinged spoilers or 
the parallel ruler action of the Schempp-Hirth brakes 
used in Germany, the brake paddles of the Hengist 
were plates curved on a transverse axis and housed 
vertically inside the wing at the mid-chord station, with 
their concave side facing forward. In action they 
pivoted around a centre some distance in front, emerg- 
ing from their letterbox-like slots to present their 
concave side to the airflow, braced by radial arms. The 
landing flaps had a highly ingenious system of bellows 
to assist the pilot in operation. To lower them, air 
scoops opened into the high-pressure zone under the 
wing and filled the bellows, which expanded to force 
the flaps down. To raise them the scoops were closed 
and the bellows then vented to the upper, low-pressure 
side of the wing and the flaps came up. This scheme, 
developed and patented by Slingsby with advice from 
the RAE at Farnborough, worked very well.
The wing was built in three pieces. A centre section 
was mounted directly on the fuselage, carrying the 
flaps and one set of brakes. The outer sections, port 
and starboard, carried the ailerons and the second set 
of brakes. The wing structure was similar to that of 
sporting sailplanes, comprising a single mainspar, 
built-up ribs and a light auxiliary spar to carry the 
control surfaces. The whole wing was skinned with 
plywood.
The fuselage was basically rectangular in cross- 
section, but with a round back and a V shaped under- 
side, cross-frames and longerons, all skinned with 
plywood. In side view it was gracefully streamlined. 
The pilot and copilot had a fully enclosed cabin with 
the transparent canopy built on a wooden frame of 
hoops with curved sheets of transparent plastic. The 
roof of the crew compartment could be jettisoned to 
allow rapid exit in an emergency. The two-seat cockpit 
had dual controls. The ailerons were operated by 
cables from large pulleys attached to the back of 
wheel-type controls and thence to the wing via bell- 
cranks and pushrods. The auxiliary controls, flaps, tow 
release, trimmers and brakes were between the seats. 
A rudimentary instrument panel was fitted, and a stan- 
dard Service compass was mounted under the pilot's 
left knee. The seats for the troops were comfortably 
shaped plywood mouldings with steel supporting 
frames, facing inwards in two cabins under the wing, 
one ahead of the main frame and one behind. Folding 
doors, one on the starboard side forward of the wing 
and one to port under the trailing edge, allowed para- 
chutists to exit simultaneously from the front and rear 
cabins. Cylindrical chutes for dropping equipment
were built in, and various other items required by the 
authorities, including radio, were fitted.
Aft of the rear cabin the fuselage could be hinged 
sideways to reduce the length of the component for 
transport on the ground. A long landing skid sprung 
with an inflated rubber tube extended along most of its 
length, and there was a tailskid, also with pneumatic 
springing. A wheeled undercarriage was provided for 
ground handling, to be jettisoned after take-off. The 
tail unit was a straightforward wooden structure with 
ribs and plywood skin. The elevator had inset hinges to 
provide aerodynamic balance, and a trim tab. The 
rudder was horn balanced.
Early test flying proved the basic design to be satis- 
factory and the controls light in operation, although 
the second prototype was wrecked in an accident at 
Dishforth in 1943. Position could be maintained on tow 
without strain, although some lateral instability was 
apparent. A diving descent after release to reduce the 
time exposed to attack could be made at 80kt. A suit- 
able approach speed for landing was 56kt and with 
flaps deployed touchdown was at 35kt.
Modifications were made to the undercarriage and 
to the shape of the front cockpit canopy, replacing the 
curved panels at the extreme front with flat sheets to 
provide an undistorted view directly ahead. The final 
outcome was the Hengist Mark 3, and a further 14 were 
built. The only serious problem was the tailskid, which 
became overheated by friction during tows along the 
ground. If no tail dolly was available the tailskid had to 
be constantly cooled by buckets of water to prevent it 
setting the aircraft on fire. Tailwheels would have been 
necessary if the Hengist had been produced in large 
numbers.
By the time the Hengist was ready for production, 
official policies had changed again. Paratroops would 
be dropped from powered aircraft. Gliders would be 
towed at low altitude until very near their designated 
landing zone, and after release would get down as 
quickly as possible with heavy equipment. The Hengist 
fuselage was not wide enough to carry vehicles or field 
guns and could not easily be adapted to do so. The 
Airspeed Horsa and the American Waco OG-4 Hadrian 
were preferred, and Hengist production ceased. Most 
of the 18 were stored, but one or two were used experi- 
mentally, all being scrapped by 1946.
The Hengist was a good-looking aircraft, but 
perhaps too much like a sailplane for its intended 
purpose. It met the specification for which it had been 
designed and incorporated some ingenious ideas in the 
flaps and airbrakes. Slingsby did not build any military 
gliders after this, but was involved with servicing and 
modifications of the Waco CG-4 Hadrian when it began 
arriving in quantities from the USA.
Half-a-dozen experimental target gliders of 4.88m 
(16ft) span, designated Type 19, were made by Slingsby 
under contract to the International Model Aircraft 
Company of Merton, south west London. Some quanti- 
ties of these were produced by Lines Brothers Ltd, the 
toy company associated with IMAC.
100

--- PAGE 103 ---
TYPE 18, HENGIST
The Bat, a tailless glider of 10.15m (33.33ft) span was 
built at Kirbymoorside in 1943. This was to establish 
the feasibility of a tank with wings which could be 
towed to a battle area, glide down to land and discard 
the wings to go immediately into battle. The originator 
of this idea was Leslie E. Baynes, designer of the Scud 
sailplanes. The Bat flew successfully in 1943, but the 
winged tank scheme was not taken further in Britain. 
Instead, the General Aircraft Hamilcar glider, which 
could carry a 7-ton tank, was designed and produced in 
quantity. In the USSR the Krylia Tank, a T-60 6-ton tank 
with a set of biplane wings and a tail on twin booms, 
was flown briefly in 1941 but proved to be impractical.
During and after 1943 the Slingsby works became 
much occupied with production, repair and mainte- 
nance of Cadet gliders for the ATC.
Hengist data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Wing sections:
Root
Tip 
Length o.a.
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
24.38m (80ft) 
72.46m-(780ft-) 
8.2
NACA2415 
NACA4412 
17.22m (56.5ft)
2,100kg(4,6291b) 
3,788kg (8,3501b) 
52.3kg/m-(10.71b/ft-)
Performance
Best glide ratio (estimate) 14:1
HCNCIST I (GUtDER) 
OCT. 142

--- PAGE 104 ---
A general view of the Hengist cockpit. (Slingsby collection)
Folding doors for the paratroops to jump from. Note the 
seats folded away on either side. (Slingsby collection)
The forward cabin, with seats for paratroops. When not in 
use the seats could be folded up against the wall. The 
cockpit is visible in front. (Slingsby collection)
The rear cabin, with seats and a view down to the tail inside 
the fuselage. Chutes for supply dropping are visible in the 
floor. (Slingsby collection)

--- PAGE 105 ---
The Hengist prototype with rounded nose. The tail dolly was 
necessary to prevent the tail-skid overheating when 
dragged over the bitumen runway. (Slingsby collection)
The cockpit, with wheel-type controls. The compass is 
TU 
. 
. 
,._,.,,, 
mounted on the floor. (Slingsby collection) 
™,e undercarriage, a long, sprung skid with wheels.
(Slmasbv collection}

--- PAGE 106 ---
Slingsby
Type 20
Drawn by Martin Simons 1993 
v£

--- PAGE 107 ---
Type 20
The ATC was still using solo training methods. As he 
contemplated the numerous broken gliders that came 
in for rebuilding, Slingsby recognised the need for 
some inexpensive and robust two-seat training gliders, 
and as a private venture set about the design of two, his 
Types 20 and 21. Both first flew in 1944.
By ordinary standards the T-20 failed. Only the 
prototype was built, and it was not ordered by the ATC. 
No attempt seems to have been made to sell it to the 
civilian clubs in post-war years. It never achieved BGA 
or Air Ministry registration, and, except for a few 
people who were directly concerned with it, it is now 
almost totally forgotten. Yet this aircraft had a remark- 
able career and met a unique fate.
There is a good deal of doubt concerning the details 
of the design. The general-arrangement drawing pub- 
lished by Slingsby in March 1945 differs considerably 
from the few known photographs, and the accompany- 
ing drawing is the best that can be made from the avail- 
able evidence. (If any further information is available, 
the author would be glad to hear of it.) Probably there 
never were any very detailed drawings, much of the 
layout work being done by direct lofting in the work- 
shops. Such jigs and tools as were needed were proba- 
bly stored for a while and destroyed when it became 
clear that the type would not go into production.
The wing was based on that of the very successful 
Type 8 Tutor but considerably enlarged. It was fabric 
covered, and had two spars with internal torsion resist- 
ing diagonal members, parallel struts and wire bracing. 
A light plywood skinning of the leading edge gave a 
smooth entry for the airflow, but contributed little to 
the strength. The wing section was NACA 4412. 
Apparently spoilers were fitted, although these were 
not shown on the published drawing. The drawing also 
showed V struts and a rounded rudder, which do not 
appear on photographs of the aircraft. As explained 
below, flaps were added later.
The central cabane was similar to that of the earlier 
Falcon 1, with two vertical struts forward and a single 
pylon aft so that the wing sat high above the rear 
cockpit. Aileron cables were partly external, running
from bellcranks on either side of the rear cockpit into 
the wing. The fuselage was very simple, being hexago- 
nal in cross-section with the two cockpits in tandem. 
There was a landing wheel mounted slightly aft of the 
loaded e.g., with a main skid sprung with the usual 
hard rubber doughnuts. The tail unit was equally 
straightforward, the rudder resembling that of an 
enlarged Tutor with a tailskid to protect it. The tail unit 
design may have been used again for the prototype T- 
21 and for a later two-seater, the T-24, but this is not 
certain. The outlines were similar. It is not known defi- 
nitely whether the fuselage of the T-20 was plywood 
skinned or whether, like a succession of later Slingsby 
types, it was a fabric covered, open framed structure.
The T-20 in wartime paint and bearing RAF roundels 
was tested and, according to Slingsby, approved by the 
ATC but disliked by RAF Training Command, who had 
the final say. It was not ordered.
Soaring was still forbidden, but most qualified glider 
pilots by now were either serving members of the fight- 
ing forces or ATC instructors, so on many occasions 
the letter of the law was not followed. On at least one 
day several sailplanes were launched to soar illegally 
in the slope lift at Sutton Bank, including the Type 20 
and Prince Bira's Cantilever Gull 3. Philip Wills and his 
son Christopher, then in his early teens, flew the T-20 
and found it to their liking. The T-21 remained in the 
hangar. It was stated in December 1944 that both of the 
new two-seaters had achieved many flying hours, but 
neither was accepted by official test pilots. The two 
prototypes languished in store.
In 1945 John Sproule, designer of the original Kirby 
Kadet and Tutor, and now a naval officer, arrived at the 
Slingsby works and took the T-20 away. It was wanted 
by the Admiralty. Sproule wrote later:
At 10.30 on the morning of May 29th, 1945,1 was air- 
borne in a Slingsby T-20 two-seat glider about 300ft 
over the waters of the Irish Sea, in a position about 
ten miles off the north-east coast of the Isle of Man. 
It struck me at the time that this was a very funny 
place to be flying a glider.
105

--- PAGE 108 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
Many accidents on or behind aircraft carriers had been 
attributed to air turbulence aft of the ship. Wind tunnel 
tests on models at the National Physical Laboratory 
revealed no very obvious cause but the number of 
occasions on which a pilot lost control just before 
arrixing over the flight deck convinced the Royal Navy 
that systematic tests needed to be done at sea. 
According to Sproule:
After discarding all sorts of ideas, from streaming 
smoke to towing balloons, someone hit on the idea of 
towing a glider from a carrier and getting the pilot to 
explore the whole of the airspace behind the ship in a 
methodical manner. The glider was to be equipped 
with recording instruments to indicate roll and pitch 
with great accuracy, so that, provided the glider 
could be maintained at fixed levels, the up trends and 
down trends in the ship's air wake could be deduced. 
Accordingly the call went out for someone who knew 
about gliders to find a suitable machine and, if possi- 
ble, perform as the pilot thereof.
In view of his pre-war experience, the lot fell upon 
Sproule. He, as it happened, was glad to avoid an immi- 
nent posting to India. Instead he was despatched 
inland to look for a suitable glider and found the Type 
20 unloved and asleep at Kirbymoorside.
After testing it by soaring it at Sutton Bank (with 
ample excuses), Sproule took the aircraft to 
Wombleton Aerodrome for modifications. Since it was 
to be towed over the sea at a relatively slow rate of 
knots it was necessary to get the stalling speed down. 
Drag was not important, since there should be no lack 
of power. Large fixed flaps were designed and fitted, 
locked down at 30°. With a 10ft towing rope attached to 
a car, the T-20 could be towed across the aerodrome a 
few feet off the ground at a brisk trotting pace. 
Meanwhile, the Admiralty research scientists devised 
an instrument package which was installed in the rear 
cockpit, with various probes and flow indicators 
attached to the wings and struts.
The aircraft carrier Pretoria Castle was based in the 
Clyde, and there Sproule and the scientists went with 
the glider. On 29 May the sailplane on the flight deck was 
attached to the winch cable as the ship turned into wind. 
Sproule was in the front cockpit, wearing a life jacket:
The T-20, positioned about 60ft forward of the 
round-down, had been equipped with walkie-talkie- 
type radio and rope pennants on each wingtip. And a 
loop of rope on the centre section to hold on to if the 
worst came to the worst! Sailors were stationed on 
each of the tip ropes and at the nose to keep the 
machine steady until I gave the word to go. When the 
ship was on course into the wind and with 35mph on 
my A SI, I got the green flag from the batsman and no 
sooner had I given the word than I was airborne. My 
Elisha-like vertical ascent was surprisingly easy as I 
pulled back against the tow cable and I let the glider 
ride at about 50ft above the deck. The glider con- 
trolled in normal fashion so I used the lift spoilers to
jockey my way down to the deck of the ship again, 
where the aircraft handlers were waiting to grab me.
The exercise was repeated successfully a few times 
before Sproule called on the winch driver to pay out 
more line. Now he climbed smoothly to about 250ft, 
watching the deck recede until he was hovering a 
ship's length behind. The air was perfectly smooth here 
and he was able to move up, down and far out to each 
side without trouble.
Suddenly he noticed a drastic loss of airspeed. The 
ship was at full speed but had sailed into a lull in the 
surface wind, and the T-20 began to lose height. 
Sproule called anxiously for more power. At the 
crucial moment the winch motor stalled and the glider 
continued to wallow downwards. With the huge flaps 
fixed down there was no chance for the sailplane to 
penetrate upwind to reach the deck. The deck officer 
hastily tried to organise a rope heaving party but 
Sproule prepared for a ducking. At the last moment the 
winch was restarted. With a mighty jerk the cable tight- 
ened and the T-20 quickly rose again to 200ft. Rather 
shaken, Sproule flew himself back to the deck. He had 
little to report about the air motions in the ship's wake 
except that he had found no turbulence or unexpected 
difficulties until the wind dropped.
The scientists were not pleased with their records, 
and found it necessary to redesign the instruments. 
The party returned to shore for further work on the 
apparatus, and Sproule was posted temporarily away 
to learn to fly helicopters. Eventually the new package 
was ready for testing and the group reassembled at 
Wombleton. There was further towing of the glider 
round and round a few feet up until the 'boffins' were 
satisfied.
After another interval of several months, during 
which the fleet was rather busy with other matters, the 
sea-going tests were resumed, this time from the deck 
of HMS Illustrious in the English Channel. Sproule 
now had a deputy who was to take turns with him in 
the glider. He made several flights himself first to prove 
the system, and all went well. His deputy, who was an 
experienced pilot with some gliding time, now climbed 
into the cockpit and received a careful briefing:
On the word 'Go' the glider was released in the 
normal manner, but this time, instead of pulling back 
on the stick and getting well clear of the deck, as had 
been carefully explained, my friend continued to fly 
about three or four feet above the deck in a zero inci- 
dence condition. In this unsatisfactory situation he 
allowed the T-20 to begin to weave left and right 
until, for some reason which I still do not under- 
stand, he weaved right across over the starboard 
side of the flight deck still only about ten feet above 
the take-off level.
The tow cable became tangled with one of the radio 
masts, which were lowered to the horizontal position 
during flying operations. The T-20 disappeared over the 
side, the wing scraping the hull as it flopped into the
1O6

--- PAGE 109 ---
TYPE 2O
sea. Those on deck saw it reappear in the wake, 
bobbing like a duck on the waves, the pilot having 
promptly got out of the cockpit on to the wing to clutch 
the rope which Sproule had installed there for this very 
purpose. The guard destroyer rescued him, but the 
glider remained afloat.
After a quick conference it was decided that the 
sailplane was not worth saving. By this time the Navy 
was well into the helicopter era, and if any further 
wake tests behind aircraft carriers were needed they 
could be done more efficiently with these aircraft. 
Sproule himself saw no future in gliding from the flight 
deck. To prevent it becoming a hazard to shipping in 
the Channel, the glider was rammed and broken into 
small pieces by the destroyer.
So ended the Slingsby T-20. It was the only glider 
ever to be flown from an aircraft carrier at sea, both 
taking off and landing on, and the only sailplane ever to 
be sunk by the Royal Navy.
Slingsby T^pe 20 data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Wing sections: 
Length o.a.
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
16.61m (54ft Gin) 
26.94m2 (290ft2) 
10.0
NACA4412 
7.39m (24ft Sin)
231kg (5091b) 
453.6kg (l,0001b) 
17.6kg/m2 (3.631b/ft2)
Performance
Max L/D 18:1 (Claimed)
Under test on dry land. Fitted with flaps, the T-20 was towed 
by car across Wombleton aerodrome. With flaps locked 
down at 30°, the stalling speed was reduced well below
22mph (35 kmh). The prominent end-plates on the inner end 
of the flaps were intended to improve the airflow but were 
evidently found unnecessary and were removed before the 
sea trials. (J. S. Sproule)
The cockpits. The front cockpit at this time had two instru­ 
ments only, an altimeter and airspeed indicator, housed in a 
small console which also acted as a windscreen. There 
seems also to have been a spirit or bubble level mounted 
below them. Note the external aileron cable, with turnbuckle. 
The tow release knob is on the left of the cockpit. (Slingsby 
collection)
Soon after completion at Kirbymoorside. The T-20 in a care­ 
fully posed head-on view. (F. N. Slingsby)

--- PAGE 110 ---
Preparations for a hand launch. The T-20, with pilot and 
instruments aboard, is airborne but is still held by some of 
the deck crew. (Admiralty photo from J. S. Sproule)
_ „ 
.iu 
. 
x . 
..„ . 
, , . 
., 
Now fully flying, only the wing-tip ropes to let go. (Admiralty 
Fully airborne, with wing-tip ropes still held by the crew, 
photo from J S Sproule) 
K 
* 
(Admiralty photo from J. S. Sproule)

--- PAGE 111 ---
A view from the bridge. The T-20 is just airborne, restrained 
by the crew. The winch, and a small tractor, are seen in the 
right foreground. (Admiralty photo from J. S Sproule)
Landing on. The crew wait to grab the glider as it comes 
down. The winch, having pulled the cable in, stands idle. 
(Admiralty photo from J. S. Sproule)
Rising on the cable with the wing-tip ropes trailing. 
(Admiralty photo fromJ. S. Sproule)
Over the side of the ship! Note the guard destroyer which 
rescued the pilot, and, subsequently, destroyed and sank 
the glider by ramming. (Admiralty)

--- PAGE 112 ---
Wing section 
Gottingen 535
Enlarged spoilers 
on late version
Early form 
of elevator
Slingsby 
Type 21 B 
Sedbergh
Symmetrical tip 
section
Drawn by Martin Simons 1992

--- PAGE 113 ---
Type 21, Sedbergh
Although it became one of Slingsby's most successful 
sailplanes, the T-21 showed few signs of its eventual 
popularity when the prototype flew in 1944. Looking 
ahead to the revival of civilian soaring clubs after the 
war, Slingsby recognised that, as well as being safer, a 
reliable two-seater sailplane would save its initial 
capital outlay in a short time. The real costs of primary 
glider training were never properly accounted. Delays 
and frustrations cost the clubs new members, and 
repair bills mounted up rapidly, soon totalling more 
than the initial cost of the glider. An experienced ATC 
instructor writing in the magazine Sailplane and 
Gliding in April 1947 remarked that solo training using 
the Kirby Cadet was 'far from economical in practice, 
the glider damage rate being sufficiently high to put the 
average civilian club on the financial rocks in a very 
short space of time'. He went on to say 'I think there is 
little or no doubt that by far the best method of ele- 
mentary training is on high-performance two-seater 
gliders such as the Kranich, but so far there is no suit- 
able two-seater yet built in this country'. Slingsby was 
convinced that training two-seaters would be in 
demand for the clubs once they started operating 
again. There was also a large potential market in the 
ATC, although the future of this organisation was not 
very certain. The gliding schools might be severely cut 
or even closed down entirely once the war ended. (In 
the event they survived on a much reduced scale.)
A student pilot would suffer few problems if the two- 
seat trainer had similar handling characteristics to 
early solo aircraft. In this case the corresponding solo 
aircraft was the Grunau Baby. Slingsby enlarged this 
basic design to carry two pilots sitting side-by-side with 
dual controls. He had done much the same kind of thing 
years before with the Falcon and Falcon 3. The T-21 
wing was aerodynamically the same as that of the Baby 
but with a span of 15.24m (50ft) and proportionately 
greater area. The same Gottingen 535 aerofoil section 
was used, with the same amount of wing washout to 
the thin symmetrical profile at the tip. There was no 
dihedral, but the outer wing panels, approximately 
elliptical in plan, were tapered on the underside.
The wing structure also followed Grunau Baby prac- 
tice, comprising a single mainspar with a plywood 
skinned torsion resisting leading edge and simple sup- 
porting struts. The light auxiliary spar was intended 
only to stiffen the ribs against sideways distortion. 
Spoilers, rather than the more expensive dive brakes, 
were fitted. The aileron hinges were very simple, with 
fabric strips stuck on above and below to seal the inch- 
wide gap. Some photographs show a bracing wire from 
the extreme nose of the fuselage to the strut fitting on 
the wings, but this was evidently superfluous and was 
removed before long. The spoiler control cables ran 
externally in guides along the rear edges of the struts.
The side-by-side seating necessitated a wide fuse- 
lage. A tall, narrow pylon with an unfaired square-cut 
front was used to provide the central wing mounting. 
For reasons of balance the cockpit was placed under 
the leading edge of the mainplane. This was the 
weakest feature of the layout, since it was impossible 
for the pilots to look horizontally into the turn when 
banking. The danger of colliding with another glider 
was barely considered. Except in competitions, there 
were very few sailplanes in the air at any one time over 
a typical club site, and the T-21 was not seriously con- 
sidered as a competition aircraft. It was not realised 
that at the bigger clubs many sailplanes would soon be 
sharing thermals and hill lift.
The older generation of instructors still maintained 
that the student glider pilot ought to feel the airflow as 
directly as possible and should learn to fly entirely 
without instruments. In a fully open primary glider a 
badly flown turn with slip or skid was instantly appar- 
ent. Airspeed variations could be sensed directly. In 
performing a circuit, the angle of the glider relative to 
the intended touchdown point was, and indeed still is, 
a better guide for making the approach than the alti- 
meter. A well developed sense of what the air is doing 
is necessary for soaring flight, and the sooner the 
student learns this, the better for future performance. 
So it was said and there was some validity in such argu- 
ments. To satisfy such opinions the entire upper 
decking ahead of the seats on the T-21 was made
111

--- PAGE 114 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
removable so that the pupil and instructor could sit 
entirely in the open, as if on the seat of a Dagling. The 
forward deck could be put in place in cold weather, or 
when the pupil had deve