ly the bottom and sides were ply-skinned. The three- 
sided box then required diagonal strutting on the 
fourth, upper, side to provide the torsional stiffness 
needed in the rear fuselage. The advantage was that, 
during construction, the inside of the fuselage could be 
more easily treated with preservatives. Access for 
inspection and maintenance in service was easier, too. 
The fabric covered enclosure above the box remained. 
A wheel was added between the main fuselage frames, 
the skid being shortened to make room for this. This 
alteration certainly was worthwhile, making the glider 
much easier to handle on the ground.
Winch launching now being the norm, an Ottfur 
releasable coupling was mounted externally on the 
extreme nose. (The Ottfur hook, produced by Ottley 
Motors was designed to release the winch cable auto- 
matically if it reached an unsafe angle during a launch.) 
Otherwise there was some minor strengthening all 
round and the entire aircraft was painted to wartime 
Air Ministry requirements, with RAF roundels. The 
name was changed from the slightly Germanic Kadet, 
to TX Mk. 1 Cadet. There was a 13 per cent gain in 
weight. In 1937 the production Kadet was advertised at 
118kg (2601b) empty. The Cadet TX Mk. 1 weighed 
134.5kg (2951b).
More ATC schools were opened. Jim Ford went to 
command No. 124 ATC Gliding School at Elstree, 
Hertfordshire. Winches, adapted from barrage balloon 
winches, were used to give ground slides and low and 
high hops, and eventually a successful a trainee would 
be launched to full height for a circuit or two, gaining 
the B gliding certificate. That was usually as far as it 
went. An order for 200 Cadets was placed with 
Slingsby, and before long the other companies men- 
tioned above were brought into the system. In addi- 
tion, a steady stream of repair work was generated and 
there was constant demand for spare parts. The solo 
training system was quite productive of broken gliders.
The ATC programme continued after the war's end, 
though it tended to taper off gradually. A good many 
Mk 1 Cadets were written off. Many had their wings 
replaced by those of the Type 8 Tutor, so there was a 
surplus of old Cadet wings stored at various places. No 
complete aircraft were released on to the civilian 
market; gliding clubs requiring them ordered them 
new from the factories. Some kits were supplied. 
Cadets were again used for their original purpose, the 
gaining of the 'C' soaring badge.
For a few years British gliding clubs persisted with 
solo training methods and still relied largely on the 
Dagling primary glider or the improved German SG 38 
type. There were now plenty of experienced instruc- 
tors who had worked with the ATC, using the Cadet, so 
it is not surprising that dissatisfaction with the old
55

--- PAGE 58 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
ways was expressed. In Februaiy 1947, G. E. P. Green 
penned an article in Sailplane and Glider entitled 
'Let's have done with the Dagling'. He wrote:
Training methods in most clubs today are right 
where they were ten years ago. Starting with those 
horrible ground slides on the 'elementary' which 
teach one nothing about flying and everything about 
the roughness of the earth's surface, via the low hop 
that frightens the instructor even more than the 
pupil, to the high hop that is frequently involuntary 
and ends with a smashed wingtip.
(ireen recommended the adoption of the Cadet for 
everything from low hops to soaring. With care, he 
argued, young beginners like the ATC cadets he had 
trained could be flying circuits after about 30 launches. 
The idea was not taken up. By the end of 1947, after 
some serious accidents with Daglings, clubs in Britain 
at last began to look round for simple two-seat training 
gliders which, though more expensive to buy in the 
first place, would last longer, earn more revenue and 
train more pilots than any kind of solo glider. The 
('adet's time had passed.
There was a swan song. A surviving Cadet was oper- 
ated at Dunstable by its owner, Peter Fletcher, for 
years. I le modified it, rounding off the wingtips, and
A Kadet with a small rudder parked behind a nacelled 
Dagling, which is about to take off, and a Slingsby Grunau 
Baby 2 in the background. (Slingsby collection)
some attention was given to sealing aerodynamic gaps 
and fairing the worst protuberances. With this aircraft 
in June 1960 John Jeffries made a cross-country 
thermal soaring flight of 212km (131.4 miles) from 
Dunstable via Stratford upon Avon to land at Cranwell. 
No one had ever flown a Cadet to such effect previ- 
ously, and nothing like it has been achieved since.
Kadet data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Wing sections:
Root 
Length o.a.
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
11.7m (38ft 6 in) 
15.8m- (170ft2) 
8.67
Gottingen 426 
6.36m (20ft lO&in)
134.5kg (2951b) 
232.7kg (5131b) 
14.7kg/m-(3.011b/ft-)
The prototype Kadet, showing the straight-backed fuselage 
with raked nose and tall rudder. The finish was clear dope 
and varnish over all. (Slingsby collection)
56

--- PAGE 59 ---
Building Cadets for the ATC in the Ings Lane factory during 
the Second World War. (Slingsby collection)

--- PAGE 60 ---
The Australian Kadet, imported as a kit in 1939 by members 
of the Gliding Club of Victoria. It first flew in January 1941. 
The aircraft still survives and is complete in Adelaide,
although not now airworthy. Note the tall rudder, the absence 
of a landing wheel and the later type of fuselage.
A Cadet at Dunstable in the post-war period. (M. Eacock)
58

--- PAGE 61 ---
TYPE 7, KIRBY KADET (CADET)
The UT-1, a Kadet built by Miller and Dawydoff in the USA. It 
was used for appraising the type as a trainer for military 
glider pilots. This aircraft, which still exists, has a straight- 
backed fuselage and tall rudder and no landing wheel, but 
the nose is of the later form. (R. Smith)
The cockpit of the UT-1, showing the handles of the wing 
mounting rods behind and above the pilot's head. A wind­ 
screen was fitted.(R Smith)
A Kadet flying at Dunstable in 1939. (A. E. Slater)
An early Kadet taking a winch launch. (Slingsby collection)
59

--- PAGE 62 ---
CO
CM
<D 
0>
25
K384-
^
*384* 
xx
- 612—
A
<\
^732 ——
[} A
^
<\
-460—
h
-x^ >
-460-
M
--
-460- 
\ X
-460- 
X ^
-460-
>».
-460-
L
-380-
I \
'380-
P
h
/
Main 
production
Root wing section 
Gottingen 426
Early 
production
Tip section
Slingsby
Type 8
Kirby Tutor
Q Drawn by Martin Simons 1991

--- PAGE 63 ---
Type 8, Kirby Tutor 
and Motor Tutor
The stimulus for the production of the Slingsby Type 8 
Kirby Tutor came early in 1937 from the Midland 
Gliding Club, based on the Long Mynd in Shropshire 
with branches at several other sites. The club pos- 
sessed ten aircraft. Having accumulated some soaring 
experience, the pilots of the Type 7 Kadets needed to 
progress to something better, and Slingsby was asked 
to produce a set of alternative, higher-performance 
wings to fit the Kadet fuselage to improve its soaring 
capacities. The idea was to rig whichever wings were 
appropriate for the prevailing conditions, getting 
almost two aircraft for the price of not much more than 
one.
Slingsby's chief and only draughtsman designer at 
that time was John Sproule, barely out of his teens, 
who had designed the Kadet. In the workshops for 
repair was a BAG VII two-seater, a few of which had 
been built to Lowe Wylde's design by the British 
Aircraft Company at Maidstone, Kent, some years pre- 
viously. The BAG VII had a two-spar, twin-strutted 
wing, the outer panels being tapered and the tips 
rounded. Its span was just under 12.5m (41ft). Sproule, 
in his own words 'ran the rule over the uncovered 
wings thereof and devised the new wings 'in some- 
what similar style'. Slingsby sent the drawings to a con- 
sulting engineer to have the stressing checked.
The wings of the Taper-wing Kadet, as it was known, 
incorporated a moderate taper from the position 
where the struts joined. Sproule remarked that he 
copied the reflexed profiles for the outer panels from 
those of the Falcon 1, building in washout and chang- 
ing the section to a symmetrical form at the tip. The 
required interchangeability of the components pre- 
vented any alterations being made to the fuselage, 
struts or root fittings. The span was now 13.2m (43.3ft) 
for the same total area as the Kadet, giving a higher 
aspect ratio which promised a measurable improve- 
ment in performance with very little increase in weight 
or cost. Sproule himself, in July 1937, did the test flight 
which was a great success.
The Midland Gliding Club took delivery of their new 
wings and the Type 8 slipped into the gliding club scene
without fuss. It was hardly acknowledged as a new 
type at all. In January 1938, the London Gliding Club 
reported the first flights at Dunstable of what was still 
described as a Taper-wing Kadet. The club did not 
immediately buy it. By the time the Surrey Gliding Club 
took delivery of one towards the end of the year, the 
name Tutor was in use. Seven complete aircraft were 
sold by Slingsby before the outbreak of war in 1939, 
but kits of parts, spares and sets of wings were also 
produced. One of the kits was sent to New Zealand and 
successfully completed and flown there. Probably, 
once tapered wings had been rigged on a Kadet fuse- 
lage, the reasons to change back were not compelling. 
Despite the lack of spoilers for approach and landing 
control, the Tutor was almost as easy for beginners to 
fly as the Kadet, and in more experienced hands it 
could stay up longer and so earn more revenue for a 
club.
As with the Kadet, the T-8, modified and renamed TX 
Mk. 2 Cadet, was ordered for the ATC gliding pro- 
gramme in 1944. The only externally visible difference 
between the Mk. 2 wing and that of the Taper-wing 
Kadet was that the leading edge was straightened, cre- 
ating a very slight sweep forward. This made little 
aerodynamic difference, but marred the appearance of 
the aircraft slightly. No spoilers were fitted even now, 
but there was a simple windscreen for the pilot, 
Strengthening, the addition of a landing wheel, and 
layers of dark camouflage paint made the Cadet Mk. 2 
heavier than the civilian version. A total of 62 were 
built at Kirbymoorside for the ATC.
After the wartime bans soaring was permitted in
1946. and the production of sailplanes for civilian use 
began again. Slingsby entered into a subcontracting 
agreement with Martin Hearn Ltd of Hooton Park, and 
a production run of 25 Tutors and a similar number of 
Cadets was undertaken by Hearn during 1946 and
1947. No changes were made to the Tutor design, 
except that the proffered paint schemes were brighter. 
A report in Sailplane and Glider in September 1946 
suggested that the 'new' Tutor was able to maintain 
height over the Sutton Bank slopes with Slingsby's
61

--- PAGE 64 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
Type 23, a version of the pre-war Kirby Kite which was 
flying on the same occasion. The Tutor stalled at 22kt, 
flew efficiently under full control at 25kt and retained a 
useful glide ratio at 35-40kt.
After the subcontracting agreement terminated, 
about a dozen more Tutors were built at Kirbymoorside, 
along with some kits and partly assembled components, 
the orders being spread over the next few years. Some 
were exported. This brought the total number of Tutors 
to more than 100 including the ATC aircraft. Others 
were built by clubs and amateur groups. Some of the 
ATC machines were subsequently sold on the civilian 
market, often requiring repairs or reconditioning.
A curious combination was found at the Long Mynd 
in the immediate post-war period. According to the 
published records, EGA No. (i57 was built by an 
amateur, D. C. Burgoyne, and was first registered as a 
Type 7 Cadet. Aft of the wing it had one of the very 
early, pre-11)39 Kadet fuselages with the straight spine 
and tall rudder, but it also possessed a landing wheel 
and an Ottfur tow coupling on the nose, bringing the 
front end to the standard of the ATC Cadet. The 
cockpit was partly enclosed with a neat canopy and 
small windscreen. In 11)50, registered G-ALTU, it was 
flying with Tutor wings. (For a short time during 
11)49-50 all gliders were required to display full 
registration letters.) It seems likely that the aircraft 
was assembled from several damaged sailplanes, 
including at least one old-style, pre war Kadet, a more 
recent Cadet TX Mk. 1, and a set of Tutor wings. 
Burgoyne is also on record as having built, or perhaps 
rebuilt, another Tutor, BGA 709, in 1954.
Many aircraft originally registered as Cadets became 
Tutors by cannibalism. The practice of interchanging 
wings seems to have ceased altogether, leaving a large 
number of old ("adet wings in storage at various places.
The absence of spoilers on the Tutor was by now 
considered a defect, so a kit for conversion was mar- 
keted and almost all of the aircraft wen* so modified.
The Avro Gliding Club undertook a more extensive 
programme of improvements on their Tutor in 1950. 
The upper side of the wing was sheeted with light- 
weight, low-density gaboon plywood back to one-third 
of the chord, improving the accuracy of the wing 
profile. Control surface hinge gaps were reduced and 
sealed, ball bearings were introduced to the control cir- 
cuits, and many other details were cleaned up. A fully 
enclosed cockpit was dexised, requiring a widening of 
the wing mounting pylon to give the pilot adequate 
headroom inside the transparent canopy. The rudder 
area was greatly increased. This Super Tutor delighted 
the club members, who reported much improved han- 
dling and performance The idea of improving the Tutor 
did not appeal to many clubs, as the amount of work 
involved was considerable and the aircraft was out of 
action for a long time during the conversion. Better 
training sailplanes were now readily available.
In 1947, against his better judgement, Slingsby was 
prevailed upon to produce the Motor Tutor, which 
became his Type 29. The wings, struts and tail unit
were retained, but a new fuselage was constructed 
with the pilot's seat under the wing, a motor in the nose 
and a wheeled undercarriage. After early test flights 
resonant \ibration in the front struts was cured by the 
addition of a small stiffening auxiliary strut a short dis- 
tance inboard of the main strut fitting on the wing, 
running vertically upwards to the spar. This modifica- 
tion was found desirable for all Tutors when they were 
aero-towed and they were modified retrospectively. 
The Motor Tutor type met considerable difficulties 
with the Air Registration Board and did not go into pro- 
duction, only two being built. The T-29 A, with a 25 h.p. 
Scott Squirrel motor, was exported. The T-29 B, 
powered by a 40 h.p. Aeronca JAP J.99, flew success- 
fully for some years but was eventually crashed, 
without injury to the pilot, during an air display at 
Dunstable in June 1964.
Tutors continued in regular service until the early 
1960s. By this time dual training had been universally 
adopted, but some clubs were reluctant to risk their 
two-seaters, which were relatively large and costly, in 
the hands of early solo pilots. It was usual, at 
Dunstable for instance, for a pupil trained on the 
Slingsby T-21 with side-by-side seating, to be sent off 
for first solo flights in a Tutor after thorough briefing. 
The first solo flight was also a conversion to a new type 
quite unfamiliar to the trainee, with a different cockpit, 
different handling characteristics and a performance 
certainly inferior to that of the T-21. The system 
seemed to work well enough, and the Tutor earned its 
place in the affection of many pilots. It was nonethe- 
less recognised as obsolescent.
At this late date an unexpected problem appeared. 
Tutors and Cadets and other types of glider of similar 
construction had given good service. They were practi- 
cal and strong, but there was a potential weakness. 
Routine inspections during major servicing of some 
hard-used ATC aircraft revealed that the spars in both 
wings were liable to damage. Compression shakes, 
caused by crushing and collapsing of the cellular struc- 
tures of the timber, were found in the spar flanges, pos- 
sibly initiated by long-forgotten heavy landings, or 
several of them. Once started the shakes worsened 
gradually over several years, and eventually one of the 
weakened spar flanges might fail in tension during a 
normal flight.
A contributory cause could be traced back to the 
very beginning of gliding in the 1920s. Almost all of the 
early two-spar gliders and training sailplanes, on 
which the original Tutor wing was based, were con- 
structed in a similar way. The spars were continuous 
beams, and on primary trainers often consisted merely 
of solid planks of wood set on edge or spindled out 
slightly to reduce weight. On secondary gliders they 
were built-up with spruce or pine flanges and vertical 
plywood webbing between to give an I or [ section. 
Their calculated strength and stiffness was normally 
quite adequate. Internal diagonal bracing, between the 
two spars, resisted torsional forces. The spars did not 
occupy the full depth of the wing, but passed through
62

--- PAGE 65 ---
TYPE 8, KIRBY TUTOR
the ribs. Each main wing rib was a single sub-assembly, 
a light girder built-up from thin strips of spruce or pine 
with plywood gussets or 'biscuits' glued over every 
joint. Rectangular openings of appropriate dimensions 
were left so that when the spars had been made and 
aligned in their jigs, the ribs could be threaded on to 
them and glued at the required spacing. The rib outline 
members bridged over the spars and diagonals above 
and below, keeping the wing covering clear of them. 
The leading edge was partly covered with plywood, but 
the skin, like the fabric over the rest of the wing, was 
not regarded as a part of the primary structure and was 
not stressed. It could be glued to the ribs only, and need 
not come into contact with the spars at all.
It was tempting, however, to attach the rear edge of 
the plywood nose skin indirectly to the spars. This was 
done on the Cadet, Tutor and many other gliders. 
Between each pair of ribs a narrow packing strip of 
wood was cut and glued to the top and bottom flanges 
of the spar, planed and sanded level with the ribs. The 
plywood skin was wrapped over the leading-edge ribs 
and glued to them and also to the packing strips. The 
packing pieces, ending abruptly at each rib station, 
created an abrupt change of stiffness in the spar. When 
the wing flexed under load, concentrations of stress 
occurred in the spar at every rib.
By 1965 most Tutors were old. Some had been in 
continuous use for more than 20 years, and had sur- 
vived hard times. Over such a long career, with occa- 
sional bad landings and clumsy handling by 
inexperienced pilots, the stress concentrations caused 
by the apparently insignificant packing strips encour- 
aged the development of compression shakes. 
Repeated rough handling over years of service would 
produce no external sign. Wherever the small com- 
pressive crushing might develop, the plywood skin and 
the ribs covered the place. The invisible damage 
tended to accumulate.
Once the problem was recognised, modification 
schedules were issued not only for Tutors but for all 
those sailplanes, including some much more advanced 
types, which incorporated similar structures. The ply 
and fabric covering was opened up and the packing 
pieces removed over a substantial part of the wing 
where the bending loads were severe, exposing the 
spars for meticulous examination and repair. The ribs 
had to be cut where they crossed the spars, and a 
continuous strip of wood, in essence an auxiliary spar 
flange, was glued in place before the ply and fabric skin 
could be replaced. If the work was done professionally 
its cost tended to exceed the cash value of the aircraft, 
and some of the remaining Tutors were scrapped.
Duly modified and carefully restored, a few Tutors 
survive in airworthy condition. In skilled hands they 
have proved themselves capable of very good cross- 
country flights. A Tutor owned by a Dunstable group 
has made excellent cross-country flights and partici- 
pates regularly in Vintage Glider Club rallies. Another, 
flown by Norman James, accumulated a total of 920km 
(570 miles) distance flying during 1989. James came
second in the informal British National Ladder 
competition which was narrowly won that year by a 
modern fibre-reinforced plastic sailplane. Among his 
flights was one of 200km (124 miles), in which he 
crossed the Solent and landed on the Isle of Wight. At 
least equally impressive were Keith Nurcombe's Tutor 
flights, which included a highly adventurous excursion 
from Husbands Bosworth into Wales, landing in 
Snowdonia after 6hr in the air. Nurcombe won the 
'Weekend Ladder' competition in 1990.
Tutors, in various states of disrepair are still offered 
for sale occasionally, and some are almost given away. 
As an indication of the life of a typical Tutor, one was 
advertised in 1990 as having done 5,629 launches for a 
flying time of 584 hr. The average flight was 6.22min. 
Also, a completely new BAG VII has been completed 
from old drawings by Michael and Tony Maufe. It 
would be possible once again to 'run the rule over the 
wings thereof.
Tutor data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Wing sections:
Root 
Length o.a.
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
13.24m (43ft 3%in) 
15.8m2 (170ft2) 
11.0
Gottingen 426 
6.36m (20.9ft)
159.5kg (350.91b) 
258.5kg (568.71b) 
16.4kg/m2 (3.361b/ft2)
Performance
Max L/D 16:1 (claimed)
ZK-GAG was a Tutor built from a kit by the Napier Aero Club in 
New Zealand about 1939, to the earliest Slingsby plans. It had 
no landing wheel or windscreen and retained the original wing 
taper. The object mounted under the port wing was a crude 
airspeed indicator: a pressure plate on a pivoted arm ten- 
sioned with a spring blown back by the air pressure against a 
graduated quadrant. The photograph was taken in 1955 and 
shows a pitot and static tube on the nose, suggesting that by 
this time another ASI had been fitted. (J. Deans.)
63

--- PAGE 66 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
A new Tutor built post-war by Martin Hearn Ltd, at Camphill, 
the site of the Derbyshire and Lancashire Gliding Club. Blue 
stripes on the rudder and the figure 1 on the nose were club 
insignia. Number 2 was a similar Tutor.
A Tutor flying at Button Bank. (P. Selinger)
G -ALTU, a composite flown in 1950 at the Long Mynd. The 
rear fuselage and tail unit are those of an original T-7 Kadet, 
but the front fuselage with wheel and Ottfur coupling on the 
nose evidently came from a later Cadet, while the wings 
were those of a Tutor. The semi-enclosed cockpit canopy 
was also a non-standard feature. ( Wills collection)
G-ALNK was a Tutor built by Martin Hearn Ltd. For a short 
period in 1949-50 gliders in Britain were required to carry 
registration letters, but the regulation was soon rescinded. 
( Wills collection)
64

--- PAGE 67 ---
TYPE 8, KIRBY TUTOR
TS 291 was originally registered as an ATC Cadet Mk 1, but 
__, 
__ 
. 
„ 
, 
, fl 
^ 
,, 
. „._, 
with new wings became a Tutor or Cadet Mk 2 
The Taper-wing Kadet flown at Dunstable in 1938 by Philip
Wills. (A. E. Slater)
A brightly painted Tutor, restored to fly at the Vintage Glider 
Rally atTerlet in 1992. (M. Simons)

--- PAGE 68 ---
Original 
rudder
520 -j-444-J275|»417-1—636^
Wing root section 
NACA 23021
First modified 
rudder
Cockpit canopy of G AAD (BGA 302)
Slingsby Type 9 
King Kite
Wing tip
section
NACA 4312
Drawn by Martin Simons 1991 
v£

--- PAGE 69 ---
Type 9, 
King Kite
In connection with the Berlin Olympic Games in 1936, 
there were gliding displays and a successful cross- 
country soaring meeting. The international commis- 
sion for the study of motorless flight, the ISTUS, 
headed by Walter Georgii, launched a campaign for 
soaring to be included as a sport in the next Olympics, 
due in 1940. It was decided to hold a big international 
championships at the Wasserkuppe in Germany from 
4-17 July 1937 as a way of publicising the Olympics 
proposal and demonstrating its feasibility. News of the 
forthcoming competition was published in Sailplane 
and Glider in January 1937. Each national team was 
limited to five sailplanes and a maximum of ten pilots. 
At first it was not certain that the British could enter. 
Although a small subsidy had been granted to the 
gliding movement, there was no government support 
for participation in such international meetings, but 
the BGA decided to make the effort. Where the money 
was coming from was not explained. After some rather 
private deliberations a team of eight was chosen.
Few British pilots had attained the Silver C badge. 
None had achieved 200hr soaring. Joan Price, who flew 
for Cobham's National Aviation Day displays, had 
more glider time than any of the others, 183hr includ- 
ing many air display flights, plus 167hr of powered 
flying. She had not completed her Silver C. (She was 
one of three women competitors.) Gerry Smith had 
95hr flying, all in gliders, Dudley Hiscox lOOhr gliding 
and 20hr under power and John Neilan 85hr and GOOhr 
respectively. Philip Wills with HOhr gliding and 510hr 
power flying, was probably regarded as the most tal- 
ented soaring pilot of the group. Flight Lieutenant P. M. 
'Willy' Watt had only 20hr in gliders, but 2,600hr flying 
in the RAF.
The BGA were reluctant for their team to fly aircraft 
of foreign design, but although Slingsby's Kirby Kite 
was produced in sufficient numbers it was quite 
uncompetitive. Only the solitary Hjordis designed by 
Mungo Buxton looked remotely suitable. However, 
Buxton had a new design in mind. A few drawings had 
already been done with the name Hjordis 2 in the 
corner. There was nothing else in prospect. If there had
been no hurry a prototype would have been built and 
thoroughly tested, any changes found necessary would 
have been made, and only then might further examples 
be built. Under pressure the BGA committed them- 
selves to Buxton's proposal. Slingsby agreed to build 
three for the team.
Buxton, a serving RAF officer, had limited time to 
devote to the project. When it came to stressing 
calculations and preparation of drawings for the work- 
shops, a young Cambridge engineering graduate, Peter 
Shaw, was employed to work with Buxton and Slingsby. 
John Sproule and Shaw set up their drawing boards 
side by side in the small office. Just how the effort was 
divided between the four is uncertain. It appears that 
Buxton himself was wholly responsible for the basic 
dimensions and layout, including the choice of aerofoil 
sections and the main structural features. Shaw, who 
had never worked on aircraft previously, although he 
was a pilot, did the required calculations and probably 
also worked out most of the detailed design with 
Sproule's assistance. The BGA's usual consultant engi- 
neer, H. C. Smith of the Supermarine Company (not Joe 
Smith of Spitfire fame, as has been thought) checked 
the figures. Buxton presumably visited the factory as 
often as possible for consultations.
Sailplane and Glider reported at Easter:
There was a lively discussion as to what the new 
machine is to be called when it has a name of its 
own. Kirby Kittiwake and Kirby Koodoo were sug- 
gested (the latter with an eye to business prospects 
in South Africa). But Slingsby has now settled the 
matter by sending the Sailplane a General 
Arrangement drawing, with the name King Kite in 
indelible ink.
Learning from the best European flights made during 
the preceding year or two, Buxton described accu- 
rately what the new soaring techniques would be. To 
achieve large distances in the few hours of a typical 
soaring day demanded a high average speed. Pilots 
would have to select only the stronger thermals. 
Loitering at the top of a climb to extract the last few
._ 
67

--- PAGE 70 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
feet of altitude wasted time which should be converted 
to distance, and the search for another strong thermal. 
Penetrating quickly through sinking air without losing 
too much height was just as important as climbing fast. 
In good conditions progress could be made without 
circling by flying slowly through lift and fast through 
downcurrents (what is now termed 'dolphin' soaring). 
To use the strong lift in cumulus and even cumulo- 
nimbus clouds would require blind flying with gyro 
instruments and oxygen apparatus. Navigational 
calculations would be required. Everything Buxton 
foresaw came to pass eventually, though in 1937 
British pilots were not ready for such developments.
Turning to the kind of sailplane that would be 
required, Buxton emphasised the need for gliding at 
high speeds. A high wing loading would be necessary. 
A fast basic aerofoil section with only a slight camber 
would be preferable, providing flaps were fitted to 
assist circling in narrow thermals at low airspeeds. The 
flaps would also permit landings in small fields, which 
had proved a serious problem with the Hjordis. 
Stability and a strong basic structure would be essen- 
tial for cloud flying. Also, after experience with Hjordis 
Buxton now recognised that the pilot must be comfort- 
able in the cockpit. If this meant sacrificing a little in 
terms of fuselage cross-sectional area and hence drag, 
the advantages of having a good seating position and 
good view would outweigh this.
The shape that appeared was a gull-winged sailplane 
with the moderate span of 15.5m (50.85ft), a high 
aspect ratio of 18 and a wing loading about 20kg/nr 
(41bs/ft2 ). The fuselage was rather plump but not out of 
proportion. Buxton's choice of wing sections, which 
aroused astonishment, was inspired by recent results 
from wind tunnels in the USA. A new range of sections 
in the NACA five-digit series had been developed. The 
point of maximum camber on all of these was much 
further forward than had been usual. In the case of the 
23021 section used for the King Kite the camber 
maximum, less than 2 per cent, occurred at 15 per cent 
of the chord from the leading edge. A more typical 
sailplane profile at this period would have had 4 per 
cent camber at about 35 per cent. The pitching moment 
of such strongly cambered profiles was large, which 
caused wings to twist at high speeds and also threw 
large loads on to the tailplane. The advantage of the 
five-digit, forward-camber section was that the twist- 
ing forces were very small. At the same time the 
maximum lift coefficient was high so the stalling speed 
of the aircraft would be moderate, despite the high 
wing loading. With flaps down, tight turns would be 
possible without increasing the rate of sink.
Knowing the danger of wingtip stalling with loss of 
control at low flight speeds, Buxton tapered the profile 
gradually to the conservative NACA 4312 at the tips. 
This section, as the four digits show, had 4 per cent 
camber at 3/10ths of the chord, and was 12 per cent 
thick. Buxton specified 3.5° of progressive washout; 
negative wing t\\ist. The usual technique to avoid tip 
stalling on a tapered wing was to change gradually
from a strongly cambered profile at the wing root to a 
symmetrical profile at the tip, combining this with a 
very large washout of seven or eight degrees. This 
ensured low-speed controllability, but at high speeds 
the outer parts of the wing were forced to operate at 
negative angles of attack, lifting' downwards. From 
the cockpit in such a situation the pilot could see the 
outer wings bending down, more severely as the air- 
speed rose. Drag increased and the sailplane lost 
height rapidly, the reverse of what was needed for 
penetration through sinking air. The torsional flexibil- 
ity of the wing tended to multiply these bad effects. By 
using a more cambered section at the tip and a compar- 
atively small washout angle, Buxton hoped to obtain 
good low-speed control without the serious loss of effi- 
ciency at high speeds. Here once again he was ahead of 
his time, even ahead of most German designers. 
Modern sailplanes use his method of combining safe 
handling at the stall with good high speed glide.
The King Kite wing was thick enough at the root for a 
very strong and deep laminated timber mainspar to be 
used. The ribs were spaced at half the usual pitch, and 
the whole was skinned with plywood. Buxton was con- 
cerned to retain full aileron control at high speeds, 
which requires a wing stiff in torsion. The closely 
spaced ribs supported the skin against buckling and 
also helped to preserve an accurate profile. Almost all 
other sailplanes at this time had fabric covering aft of 
the main spar, usually clear doped and hence trans- 
lucent, with the fabric sagging slightly between the 
ribs. The King Kite looked very solid and smooth in 
comparison. The flaps, confined to the inboard section 
of the wing, were also plywood covered, and could be 
lowered to a large angle for landing. Only the ailerons, 
suitably braced diagonally, were covered with fabric.
Buxton gave some thought to reducing interference 
drag, but in the absence of wind tunnel tests decided to 
mount the wing as simply as possible at shoulder level 
on the fuselage without any elaborate fairings. The spars 
were attached to the main cross-frames on each side 
with the necessary strong steel fittings and heavy struc- 
ture to carry the bending loads through the fuselage. The 
gaps at the wing junctions on each side were closed by 
simple plywood strips clamped in place after rigging.
The fuselage was of the usual plywood skinned 
semi-monocoque type, with a large and comfortable 
cockpit. The rudder pedals were adjustable, which 
pilots found wholly admirable. A neat transparent 
canopy, built-up from curved sheets of plastic screwed 
to a light wooden frame, was fitted. Although it spoiled 
the smooth outline of the nose to some extent, it cost 
very little in terms of drag and gave the pilot a clear 
view ahead and, in turns, to the sides and above. A 
bungee hook was fitted at the nose, along with an aero 
tow and winch launch coupling. There was the usual 
rubber-sprung laminated ash skid for landing and a 
steel spring tailskid. When landing on a skid, the tail of 
a sailplane cannot be lowered as much as can be done 
if there is a wheeled undercarriage. A large rigging 
angle of wing to fuselage is required so that the touch-

--- PAGE 71 ---
TYPE 9, KING KITE
down can be close to the stalling angle of attack. On 
the King Kite 10° incidence was used. This necessi- 
tated setting the main fuselage frames, which carried 
the wing fittings, at this angle to the datum. The tail 
unit was straightforward, mostly fabric covered, with 
small horn balances on the elevators.
The prototype was completed and test flow