suing turbulent boundary layer. 
The cockpit canopy was a transparent moulding cut 
into two pieces, the forward part secured to the fuse­ 
lage and the rear part removable and with a frame of 
glass rovings. It had to fit very accurately and conform 
to the aerodynamic contour. The fin was built as part of 
the fuselage shell. The main landing wheel was retract­ 
able, but the tailwheel was not. The T tailplane, built in 
much the same way as the rest, gained efficiency 
because of its high position clear of the wing wake.
Flaps were coupled to the ailerons to change the wing 
camber for slow and high airspeeds. By means of a 
separate handle, the flaps drooped to 35° independently 
of the ailerons for landing. Airbrakes were operated by 
the usual lever, but a drogue parachute housed in a 
compartment at the base of the rudder could be 
deployed as well. Inside the wing leading edge there 
were large bags to carry water ballast, with a knob in the 
cockpit behind the pilot's head, reached by some mild 
contortions, for jettisoning the water before landing or 
when the thermals became weak. To reduce the likeli-
238

--- PAGE 241 ---
TYPE 59, KESTREL
hood of pilot-induced oscillations at high speeds, the 
stick worked with a parallel action linkage giving a fore 
and aft motion. A particularly good feature was the ele­ 
vator trim control, which was mounted on the stick with 
a self-acy usting spring. The pilot needed only to hold t he 
stick in the desired position, press a small button with a 
finger, and the trim was set.
Rigging the Kestrel was easy, although the wings 
were heavy. The system was based on that of the 
Libelle. One wing had a forked spar end which the 
other undivided spar fitted into, steel spigot extensions 
mating with self-aligning sockets in the opposite wing. 
As the wings were pulled together, using an ingenious 
but very simple lever, they simultaneously picked up 
the spigots on the tubular steel fuselage cross- 
members. The assembly was completed by inserting a 
horizontal locking pin which passed right through the 
spar fork on the centreline. Brake and flap linkages 
were automatic as the wings went on, but the ailerons 
had to be connected and checked by hand. The 
tailplane was slotted into place, picking up elevator 
control spigots automatically, and locked on with a 
spring-loaded pin set into the fin leading edge.
Joining up the plumbing and filling with ballast 
became a normal ritual unless the weather was obvi­ 
ously very poor. The drogue parachute was supposed 
to be repacked before each flight. Small cameras 
loaded with fresh film for photographing turning 
points in competition races, badge flights or record 
attempts were fastened to a small bracket on the 
cockpit side and arranged so that the wingtip would 
always appear in the picture.
Before getting into the cockpit it was wise to make 
sure the wings were clean, as the crushed bodies of 
insects on the leading edge caused a very noticeable 
loss of performance. Nothing could be done about 
insects picked up during flight. (In-flight wing wipers 
had not yet been invented. They do exist now.) 
Raindrops on the wing had an effect like opening small 
airbrakes. Rudder pedals could be adjusted and the 
seat back repositioned in flight, and cushions under 
the thighs could be inflated or deflated by small hand- 
pumps. Depending on the type of instrumentation and 
radio, and whether oxygen breathing equipment was 
carried, the pilot might be confronted by some 20 or 30 
items of varying importance to be checked before take- 
off. Written checklists became necessary rather than 
the simple mnemonics used hitherto.
During the take-off roll it was best to set the flaps to 
a slight negative position which improved aileron 
response at low speeds while the tailwheel was still on 
the ground to keep straight. As full control became 
available, lowering the flaps slightly allowed the 
sailplane to lift off. Handling in the air was good. The 
Kestrel was stable in pitch and there was no tendency 
to drop a wing in a stall or slow turn. Continuous spins 
were possible only at the aft e.g. limit with ailerons 
held into the spin, recovery requiring less than a full 
turn. Spinning deliberately was not encouraged, as the 
airspeed during the recovery might exceed the safe
maximum and the airbrakes were not large enough to 
keep the airspeed within limits in a dive, especially if 
the tanks were full of water. The parachute brake 
would have been sufficiently effective, but once 
deployed could not be retracted. It was possible to 
jettison it, but this would probably result in losing it 
entirely. Control forces were relatively light, although 
the rate of roll was not high. Aerobatics were not 
approved because of the danger of a badly executed 
manoeuvre causing excess airspeed.
Getting such an aircraft safely down in an outlanding 
required good standards of airmanship and judgement. 
The retractable wheel had to be lowered and the 
ballast dumped. Landing with the water still on board 
was not advisable because of the likelihood of greater 
shock loads on the undercarriage and the extended 
ground run after touchdown, though it could be done 
with care on a smooth surface. When dumping the 
water it poured out through the wheel well, taking a 
little less than 2min to empty completely. With full flap 
and even without the drogue, touchdown airspeed was 
about 35kt, slow enough to land in quite small spaces.
The best glide ratio was measured at 1:41, compared 
with the Skylark's 36. Much more importantly, with flaps 
slightly raised it was reasonable to fly the Kestrel 
between thermals at airspeeds above 80kt, at which 
speed the glide ratio was still about 1:25. This glide ratio 
at high airspeed was superior to the maximum achieved 
by many of the better 'pre-laminar-flow' sailplanes at half 
the speed. In the final stages of arace with some margin of 
height to spare, the Kestrel could be flown safely at 1 lOkt 
or even up to 135kt, which was the permitted maximum. 
Such fast finishes with the water streaming out and 
leaving a visible trail behind were not at all unusual.
From the beginning the Kestrel was criticised by 
some pilots because it was said not to climb very well 
in weak thermals. The most influential of these critics 
was George Moffat in the USA, who carried out some 
comparative flying of one of the early Glasfliigel 
Kestrels against his own Cirrus. In a widely-read article 
in the magazine Soaring, early in 1970, he complained 
that the Kestrel was too heavy and that the rate of roll 
was too slow. Other pilots disagreed, although it was 
true that in flight at low airspeeds the pilot could hear 
noise suggestive of airflow separation behind the 
cockpit. It seemed that the contraction of the fuselage 
cross-section might have been overdone slightly, but in 
competition the Kestrel climbed well enough, even 
with full ballast. Some damage was done to sales 
prospects by these reports even before Slingsby's 
products came on to the market.
In August 1970 the first Kestrel built at Slingsby 
emerged to fly, followed by the second early in 
December. These were in most respects identical to 
the Glasfliigel product. Hanle had changed the cockpit 
canopy to hinge just behind the pilot's head and lift up. 
(The original canopy was longer and lifted off com­ 
pletely for access to the cockpit and wing roots.) A 
matt black shield was added in front of the instrument, 
console to prevent internal reflections on the front
239

--- PAGE 242 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
canopy, \\1ien the aircraft, works number 1722, had 
passed its preliminary test flights, a camera which 
could be operated from the cockpit was fitted to the 
fin. Its field of view included the wing root junction 
with the fuselage. Wool tufts were fixed all over this 
area and Geoff Bailey-Woods, the company test pilot, 
was instructed to fly at low speeds and take photo­ 
graphs. The results were surprising. The wool tufts 
indicated an area extending from the fuselage junction 
for about a metre outwards along the span in which the 
air on the surface was proceeding in a circle, some of 
the tufts pointing in a direction opposite to that of the 
main stream. Glasfliigel were informed at once, and 
technical departments in both factories tried to work 
out a solution. Hanle had the advantage of having Dr F. 
X. Wortmann of Stuttgart University as a consultant, 
and most modern sailplanes at this time used 
Wortmann wing profiles. With access to a research 
wind tunnel, Wortmann and his colleague Dieter 
Althaus developed a large fillet at the wing root junc­ 
tion which, by reducing the rate at which the combined 
cross-sectional area of the wing/fuselage was reduced, 
effectively cured the problem.
The airbrakes, which in the Glasfliigel version had 
opened above and below the wing, were changed to 
emerge from the top surface only. Some other small 
improvements were made in the cockpit, in particular 
the addition of a removable tray covering the spar junc­ 
tion under the rear of the canopy. On this was mounted 
an adjustable headrest, radio and batteries, and extra 
instruments, such as a barograph. The original type of 
lift-off extended canopy was reintroduced. The flaps 
were coupled to the ailerons to improve the rate of roll 
(as well as the ailerons being coupled to the flaps for 
camber changing). The company now felt confident 
enough to begin production, and the first five 17m 
Slingsby Kestrels were ready in April 11)71.
Vet before these first few Kestrels were being fin­ 
ished at Kirbymoorside even better sailplanes had 
appeared, George Burton took an experimental 19m 
version, the T-59B, to the World Championships at 
Marfa, Texas, in June 1970. This was an ordinary 
Glasfliigel Kestrel with an extra metre of wing spliced 
on to each tip. It was permitted to fly under experi­ 
mental licence in the USA. Burton came fourth. The 
Glasfliigel Kestrel (i()4, a 22m development, was there 
too, and so was the prototype 22m Nimbus from 
Schempp-Hirth, with which which (ieorge Moffat won 
the contest despite some serious handling difficulties. 
As Slingsby himself had said years before, there is no 
substitute for span, and these new aircraft had a 5m 
advantage. Good though the Kestrel 17 was, it could 
not compete with this new generation of monsters. 
Development would not stand still. It was announced 
that after the first five, no more of the 17m Kestrels 
would be produced at Kirbymoorside. Hanle was 
therefore free to reintroduce Kestrel 17 production in 
Germany, which he did. A total of 12!) were built, plus 
()01 of the Standard Libelles.
Work on a l!»m Slingsby Kestrel had already begun,
and it was intended that production would be under 
way by the end of 1971. The span was extended by 
adding half a metre at the root and half a metre at the 
tip of each wing. After a good deal of research and 
testing under Tucker's direction, a carbonfibre spar 
was made and used in the wing of the prototype 
Kestrel 19, the T-59C. This flew in May 1971, only three 
weeks before Burton was to compete with it in the 
British National Championships. He came second, and 
in the Coupe d'Europe at Angers in France in July he 
took third place, beaten by a Kestrel 17 and an ASW 12, 
partly because the flaps of the T-59 were not yet prop­ 
erly adjusted and various other minor problems had 
been discovered.
So far as known, this was the first time any aircraft in 
the world had used carbonfibre for an important struc­ 
tural member. It was an important step. The new spar 
was much stiffer and stronger than the glass one, 
although it was very much more expensive. For a time 
it appeared that Slingsby had not only caught up with 
developments in their field but had begun once again to 
lead the way, although other sailplane manufacturers 
were not far behind. A consequence of the carbon spar 
was that the greatly increased wing stiffness in 
bending gave the pilot a much harder ride in rough air. 
This also created problems with the root end fittings, 
which began to show signs of metal fatigue and had to 
be replaced. Cost prevented the immediate adoption of 
carbon for production 19m Kestrels.
The T-59C was used for development and test work 
during the rest of the summer. Some longitudinal 
stability problems were overcome by introducing a 
small, sharp cusp on the trailing edge of the elevator. 
An inescapable increase in stick forces was only partly 
alleviated by the use of stronger springs in the trimmer 
control circuit. Production did not start until this and 
other minor difficulties had been sorted out.
The prototype Kestrel 19 with glass spars did not fly 
until September 1971, and it was the end of the year 
before Slingsby was able to advertise that 'after three 
years of development, all the bugs arc4 out of it and its 
performance is the equal of any super ship on the 
market'. Support for this claim came with summer in 
the southern hemisphere, when a Kestrel 19 flown by 
Ingo 
Renner 
won 
the 
Australian 
National 
Championships held over the New Year period.
Depending 
on 
whether 
the 
Certificate 
of 
Airworthiness was issued by the BGA or the Civil 
Aviation Authority (both bodies were empowered to 
issue the certificate), the Kestrel 19 was known as 
either the T-59D (BGA) or T-59K (('AA).
The wings of the original 17m Kestrel were heavy. The 
19m wings weighed 93kg (2051b) each, totalling 60 per 
cent of the bare structural weight. With maximum load, 
instrument s, batteries, pilot and water ballast the gross 
weight was 472kg (l,0401b). The old Skylark 4, with an 
all-up weight of 376kg (8301b), had a maximum wing 
loading of 23.35kg/m2 (4.5Glb/ft2). The Kestrel 19 fully 
laden reached 36.9kg/m2 (7.51b/ft2) and was already 
beginning to seem too light for good soaring weather.
24O

--- PAGE 243 ---
TYPE 59, KESTREL
By the time of the British National Championships in 
May-June 1972, Kestrel 19s were coming out of the 
factory regularly. Six were flown in the championships, 
John Delafield flying one to win after six hard days.
Other minor changes were introduced at various 
stages during production. An anti-balance tab was 
included on the elevator to allow removal of the cusp 
and reduce stick forces. A 10 per cent larger, lighter 
rudder was required to help control of the extended 
wing in yaw. The weight reduction was achieved by 
cutting away much of the glass cloth skin and covering 
with fabric. Rudders on 'Open Class' sailplanes with 
their huge spans and short fuselages have never been 
adequate, and in this respect the Kestrel 19 was no 
different from the rest.
Eight Slingsby Kestrel 19s, including Burton's with 
the carbon spar, flew at the World Championships in 
Yugoslavia in July 1972. As well as the British, the 
Australian, Czech, Canadian, New Zealand and 
Japanese pilots flew the T-59. They met competition 
from the latest Nimbus (which won, flown by Goran Ax 
of Sweden), the ASW 17 and the Polish Jantar 2. Nick 
Goodhart came 4th and Burton 6th. This championship 
was greatly affected by a series of very bad thunder­ 
storms. A Hungarian pilot was killed by a lightning 
strike in cloud, a Canadian in a bad weather landing 
accident, and there was a mid-air collision from which 
the pilots saved themselves by parachute. An 
Australian pilot was arrested by a village policeman 
after landing too close to the Albanian border, and 
several others had cameras, parachutes and other 
equipment stolen from their cockpits.
In September 1972, Dick Georgeson in New Zealand 
broke the world out-and-return record in his Kestrel 
19, flying in lee waves generated by a north west wind 
over the Southern Alps. The total distance was 
1001.94km (623 miles). It was the first time a sailplane 
had flown more than 1,000 km round a predeclared 
task. (The record was broken a month later in the USA, 
and again there two days later.)
In May 1973 Fred Slingsby died, aged nearly 80. He 
was greatly mourned. Although he had little active role 
in the company after his retirement in 1964, he had 
never lost interest. In 40 years he saw gliding progress 
from the days of crude primary training gliders and the 
strut and wire braced open cockpit British Falcon, 
built in his Scarborough furniture factory, to an era of 
giant spans, water ballast, sophisticated aerodynam­ 
ics, complicated electronic instruments, extraordinary 
new materials and methods of construction. He was 
instrumental in reviving the company when it had 
seemed doomed in 1969.
When the performance of the Kestrel 19 was mea­ 
sured by an independent test group the best glide was 
found to be 1:44. New, bigger German production 
sailplanes by this time were getting close to and even 
exceeding 1:50. They had the advantage of extra span 
but they also achieved better standards of accuracy in 
the wing surfaces.
It was recognised internationally that the trend to
huge spans in the unrestricted or 'Open' class was 
getting out of hand. A 29m two-seat sailplane, the 
Brunswick Akaflieg SB-10, was already flying in 1972 
with a best glide of 1:53. It broke world records in the 
following year. (The SB-10 was not the largest 
sailplane ever built. The Austria of 1931, flown by 
Robert Kronfeld, spanned 30m.) In an attempt to check 
rising costs, it was announced that at the next World 
Championships, to be held at Waikerie in Australia in 
January 1974, a special cup would be awarded for the 
best score by a sailplane of 19m span or less. This, it 
was hoped, would give manufacturers something to 
aim for which would not be financially crippling for 
pilots, although it was soon pointed out that a 19m 
sailplane made entirely from carbon would cost more 
than a larger aircraft using glass. The Kestrel 19 flown 
by the Austrian pilot Hammerle won the cup when the 
time came, but it was almost by default. His position 
overall was 9th. There was only one other modern 
sailplane design of 19m span contending, the Polish 
Jantar 1. Interest in the 19m cup faded.
The 1975 British Championships in May/June were 
dominated by Kestrels, eight coming in the top ten and 
George Lee winning. The run of excellent competition 
results continued through the season, but by June 1975 
all outstanding orders for the T-59 had been met and 
the company announced that it would wait for at least 
five more orders before re-establishing production of 
the type. It seems that the five orders never material­ 
ised. In 1975 Hanle was killed in a light aeroplane acci­ 
dent 
and 
his 
company 
was 
absorbed 
by 
Schempp-Hirth. There were no prospects of any new 
agreements in that quarter.
The Kestrel 19 had been successful, with exports all 
over the world, including Italy and South Africa. Three 
had even gone to Germany, nine to the USA, three to 
New Zealand and six to Australia. More than 90 were 
built, one being sold incomplete for finishing by the 
owner. More than 40 were still registered in Britain in 
1994. But in the end there was no apparent financial 
profit. What had been gained was experience in the use 
of composite materials.
At Waikerie, George Burton had announced the 
development of a 22m Kestrel, the T-59G. This was to 
be achieved ingeniously by adding a 1.5m root exten­ 
sion piece on each side, producing a four-piece wing. 
Owners would be able to buy a conversion kit. The root 
sections would plug into the existing fuselage, and 
would in turn accept the old 19m wings without any 
alteration. A 25 per cent bigger tailplane was required, 
but no further changes would be necessary. It proved 
less easy than expected to make the conversion. The 
undercarriage had to be strengthened, the rear fuse­ 
lage skins required extra laminations of glass cloth, 
and the area of the vertical tail had to be increased by 
35 per cent. This was done by adding 75mm of chord to 
the rudder and extending the fin area above the 
tailplane.
When it came to test flights, the handling of the T- 
59G was fairly satisfactory, but no one seemed inter-
241

--- PAGE 244 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
ested in what pilots probably thought of as a 22m 
sailplane cobbled together. The wing stubs and fin 
extension were scrapped and the aircraft was sold as a 
19m Kestrel. The increased rudder and tailplane areas 
and stronger rear fuselage were incorporated in the 
last few Kestrel 19s off the production line.
It was now decided to develop an entirely new 22m 
Kestrel, the T-59H. This, advertised late in 1975, had the 
wing in four pieces, but the division now came out­ 
board of the airbrakes. A carbon spar was used. The 
fuselage was extended behind the main wing junction 
by 750mm, allowing the standard tail to be retained. A 
stronger landing gear was incorporated. A first batch 
of three was planned, but problems arose when the 
prototype was test-flown. The company test pilot was 
now Norrie Grove, an ex-RAF pilot. All went well until 
the time came to prove the aircraft to a flight speed up 
to 169kt. This was to allow a reasonable safety margin 
over and above the permitted maximum speed which 
would be placarded in the cockpit. When Grove 
reached 140kt he reported that something drastic hap­ 
pened which prevented him from going faster.
The Kestrel was taken to Lasham for further tests. 
George Burton, who had flown for five years at the 
RAE had no idea what was wrong and decided, without 
any extra instrumentation or preliminary calculations, 
to do the tests himself. After a tow to 1,800m (6,000ft) 
he rashly accelerated in a steep dive. At 140kt the wing 
fluttered so violently that he had difficulty holding the 
stick, but he succeeded in gradually pulling out of the 
dive and, with everything still apparently working, flew 
gingerly back to Lasham to land safely. Inspection 
revealed considerable damage to the flaps, and the 
glider was hurriedly de-rigged and taken back to the 
factory.
Two 22m Kestrels were taken to the 1976 World 
Championships, one, registered G-BDWZ, to be flown 
carefully in the contest by the Irish pilot Jeremy 
Bryson. The other, G-BDZG, delayed by the repair 
work, arrived late in the fortnight for demonstration 
and flying by prospective customers. A safe limiting 
speed was imposed, but an over-exuberant pilot 
allowed the Kestrel demonstrator to exceed the limit in 
a fast run over the aerodrome. At about 135m(450ft) 
there was a loud noise and the alarmed watchers on 
the ground saw the wings \ibrating so violently that 
they seemed to disappear in a blur. The pilot managed 
to slow down and land safely, white-faced and severely 
shaken.
The RAE was consulted by Slingsby's technical 
department. The flutter, which involved wingtip deflec­ 
tions of about 30cm up and down, was symmetrical 
and had two nodes. That is, the fuselage and the inner 
wing moved up and down \iolently as the tip panels, 
out of phase, moved down and up with, at some point 
along the wing between root and tip, a node or cross­ 
over point which moved neither up nor down as the 
wing distorted on either side of it. (The Akaflieg stu­ 
dents at Brunswick in 1970 had already researched and 
filmed spectacular, continuous but damped asymmet­
ric flutter in their 22m SB 9. They went on to extend the 
span to 29m in the SB 10.)
The problem with the T-59H was lack of torsional 
stiffness in the wing. At the time carbonfibre cloth was 
not available, so the wing skin was of conventional 
glass cloth and foam sandwich. This did not give suffi­ 
cient torsional rigidity to match the bending stiffness 
of the carbon spar. The two completed 22m Kestrels 
were given a severely restricted maximum speed of 
105kt and were sold at reduced price. No attempt was 
made to build any more.
The only Slingsby product competing at the World 
Championships in Finland in 1976 was the lone Irish 
pilot Bryson's Kestrel 22. He had taken delivery of this 
unproven aircraft only two days before leaving for the 
contest, and did not do well. (On return to Ireland he 
and his syndicate partners made some outstanding 
height climbs in this aircraft.) Ironically, George Lee, 
the Kestrel 19 British champion of 1975, won the 1976 
World Championships flying a German ASW 17 from 
Schleichers. George Burton, chosen by the BGA to 
compete in the 15m Standard Class, had no suitable 
British sailplane to fly and selected a Finnish Pik 20 to 
take third place.
Both of the Kestrel 22s survive and in 1994 were 
flown regularly: Bryson's aircraft, BGA 2470, is based 
at Cambridge after changes of ownership and the 
other, BGA 2481, is at Crowland. Tests by the owners, 
among whom is Peter Bisgood, an experienced test 
pilot, have demonstrated flutter-free airspeeds up to 
135kt. The maximum permitted speed was therefore 
raised to 125kt. The rate of roll of these large aircraft is 
relatively slow, but they perform well and have given 
good service. The total of all marks of Kestrel built at 
Kirbymoorside was 105, including the five original 
Kestrel 17s and the Kestrel 22s.
The development costs of the Kestrel 22 were 
carried by Vickers Shipbuilding division as a research 
project. Under Sir Leonard Redshaw's protection, the 
true financial situation of the aeronautical part of the 
business was not made immediately obvious to the 
parent company's accountants, but at the end of 1975 
Vickers had regrouped and Slingsby Sailplanes 
became Vickers-Slingsby, a division of Vickers 
Offshore Engineering. What the future held was again 
very doubtful. It was advertised that Slingsby's involve­ 
ment in gliding would continue, but it now represented 
a much smaller part of the business. How much 
smaller soon became apparent. For months the 
company's advertisements offered only gliding instru­ 
ments and accessories from stock. Sailplane produc­ 
tion ceased, and it was uncertain that it would ever 
begin again.
242

--- PAGE 245 ---
Root section
WortmannFX67-K-17 
(Flap 17%)
Section
Wortmann
FX67-K-15
(Flap 15%)
10 S
CO 
00
CO 
CD
Slingsby 
Type 59 H 
Kestrel 22
Tip section
Wortmann FX 67-K-15 
(Flap 15%)
Drawn by Martin Simons 1995

--- PAGE 246 ---
The first T-59A 17m Kestrel built by Slingsby prepares for 
take-off with Geoff Bailey-Woods as test pilot. The short 
canopy, with rear hinge, was introduced by Glasflugel but 
was changed to the older, long canopy on the Slingsby 
Kestrel 19. (G. Bailey-Woods)
Type 59 Kestrel 17 data 
Dimensions 
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a. 
Wing sections 
Root
Tip
17.00m (55.78ft) 
11.6m 2 (123.8ft2) 
25.1 
6.72m (22ft)
Wortmann FX 67-K-17 (17 per cent
flap)
Wortmann FX 67-K-15 (15 per cent
flap)
Weights 
Tare 
Flying 
Ballasted 
Wing loading
210kg(463b) 
350kg (772b) 
400kg (882b)
30.3kg/m2 (6.2b/ft2) to 36.8kg/m2 
(7.54b/ft2)
Flap movement: up max 8°, down (normal) 12°,
(landing) 35°.
The instrument panel and cockpit of the T-59A, 17m Kestrel. 
On the left side of the cockpit are the flap and airbrake 
levers, the canopy latch, ventilator and drogue parachute 
deploy handle. On the right cockpit wall are the under­ 
carriage retracting handle, seat back adjustment, canopy 
latch and ventilator. On the central console, left to right are 
the tow release below the landing flap handle, canopy de- 
mister and drogue jettison handle, with rudder pedal adjust­ 
ment below. On the stick are the radio transmit button, 
elevator trimmer and wheel brake. On the seat, hand pumps 
for inflatable seat cushion. The water ballast tap is behind 
the pilot's head. (G. Bailey-Woods)
T-59D Kestrel 19
Dimensions
Wingspan 
19m (55.5ft)
Wing area 
12,80m2 (138.5ft2)
Aspect ratio 
282
Length o.a. 
6.72m (22ft)
Wing sections, as for T-59
Weights
Tare 
295kg (650b) 
Flying 
400kg (880b) 
Ballasted 
426kg (940b) 
Wing loading (max)33k^m2 (6.78b/ft2)
T-59H Kestrel 22 
Dimensions 
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a.
22m (72.18ft)
15.44m2 (166.2ft2)
3135
7.80m (25.6ft)
Wing sections, as for T-59
Weights
Tare 
390kg (860b) 
Flying 
559kg (1,232b) 
Ballasted 
659kg (1,450b) 
Wing loading (max)4Z65kg/m2 (8.74b/ft2)
244

--- PAGE 247 ---
George Burton releasing water ballast in the Kestrel 19 at 
the World Championships at Waikerie in 1974. (M. Simons)
The smooth front lines of the Kestrel were designed to pre­ 
serve the laminar boundary layer as far as possible. 
(G. Bailey-Woods)
Wool-tuft tests on the Kestrel 17 revealed serious flow 
separation on the fuselage and wing roots at low flight 
speeds. Apart from general turbulence close to the fuselage, 
the tufts show a definite circular pattern over the wing, 
extending for about a metre. Pilots could hear the dis­ 
turbance from the cockpit. At higher airspeeds the problem 
vanished. (G. Burton)
Canadian pilot Richard Mamini in a Kestrel 19 landing at the 
World Championships, Waikerie in 1974 (M. Simons)
The central fittings of the Kestrel 17, showing the inter­ 
locking spars and one of the tubular steel cross-members 
picking up on the wing roots. The ballast tap and plumbing 
are also visible. (M. Simons)

--- PAGE 248 ---
George Burton flying the prototype Slingsby Kestrel 17 with 
the new wing root fairings
The Kestrel 19 showing the wing-root fairing developed to 
cure the low-speed flow problem. (M. Simons)
A Kestrel 19 showing the tray mounted over the wing roots to 
carry batteries and barograph. (M. Simons)
246

--- PAGE 249 ---
TYPE 59, KESTREL
The Austrian pilot, Hammerle, won the 19m World Cup in his 
Kestrel 19 at Waikerie in 1974. (M. Simons)
The Glasflugel 604, a 22m version of the Kestrel, flown by 
Bert Zegels at the 1974 World Championships at Waikerie. 
(M. Simons)
247

--- PAGE 250 ---
Fuselage 
datum
Retracting tailwheel
Fin section 
Wortmann FX-71-L-150/30
Tailplane section
Wortmann 
FX71 -L-150/20
Sport Vega
Non retracting 
main wheel
Brakes only. 
No flap
8deg 
Scale x 3
Air brake
Lifting handle
Tip section
Wortmann
FX-67-K-150
Non retracting tailwheel
Slingsby T - 65 
Vega
Drawn by Martin Simons 1994 ©

--- PAGE 251 ---
T-65, Vega
The Standard Class is dead,' wrote Mogens Petersen, a 
former chairman of the Danish Gliding Union, late in 
1975. Though his opinion proved false in the long run, 
it was shared by many in the gliding movement at the 
time. The Standard Class of competition sailplanes had 
been established by the CIW (gliding commission of 
the Federation Aeronautique Internationale) in the 
1950s. The original formula was straightforward. The 
span was limited to 15m, and there had to be speed-lim­ 
iting airbrakes, a non-retractable landing wheel, no 
wing flaps, no water ballast tanks and no complica­ 
tions. The outstanding exemplar was Rudolf Kaiser's 
design, the Ka 6. No other sailplane since the old 
Grunau Baby has ever been produced in such quanti­ 
ties.
Bit by bit the rules were eroded. To save drag, under­ 
carriages in some designs were so deeply buried in the 
belly of the fuselage that they caused poor take-off 
behaviour and gave inadequate protection from 
damage in field landings on rough ground. Retracting 
wheels were safer, caused less drag and were only a 
little more expensive. The Standard Class specification 
was changed. Such aircraft as the Standard Libelle and 
the Standard Cirrus resulted; glass-plastic aircraft with 
excellent performance, cheaper than the huge Open 
Class types and very popular. Then water ballast was 
permitted. Existing sailplanes could be adapted 
without too much cost, and the advantages in opera­ 
tional flexibility were worthwhile. There were few pro­ 
tests.
The next relaxation came close to destroying the 
Standard Class concept altogether. It was argued 
vigorously by some designers that simple trailing-edge 
flaps that could be lowered to 90°, as used on Richard 
Schreder's HP-14, were simpler and cheaper than air­ 
brakes. This was true. Housing the usual vertical paral­ 
lel-ruler type of brakes in the wings created many 
structural difficulties. Brake boxes and skin dis­ 
continuities in the wings created stress concentra­ 
tions. Opening, closing and locking brakes shut 
required quite complicated mechanism, and sealing 
them properly against air leakages when closed was
difficult. When the brakes were open the lift load distri­ 
bution changed markedly, throwing more load on to 
the outer wing panels. The CIW changed the rules 
again to permit flaps, providing they were not coupled 
with the ailerons to change the camber across the 
whole wingspan. The idea was that they should be 
used only as brakes, but there was no way the 
Commission could prevent a pilot using the flaps to 
vary the wing camber in flight, gaining some aero­ 
dynamic advantage both in the climb and in high-speed 
glides.
In the 1974 World Championships, held at Waikerie 
in Australia, Helmut Reichmann of Germany flew the 
LS-2 with flaps conforming to the new rules. In this 
sailplane the ailerons were truncated to a bare 
minimum, allowing the flaps to extend over most of the 
span. The rules had nothing to say about this. Handling 
during the slow phases of take-off and landing verged 
on dangerous, and the rate of roll was poor, but 
Reichmann won the championship by a small margin 
over Ingo Renner in a Standard Cirrus. Ironically, on 
the 11th and last day, at the start of which Renner was 
leading, the Cirrus developed a problem with its air­ 
brakes, which would not lock closed properly. This 
delayed and slowed Renner down enough to let 
Reichmann and the LS-2 take the title.
It seemed that all of the older Standard Class 
sailplanes were now uncompetitive. Aspiring champi­ 
ons would have to replace their aircraft with brutes 
like the LS-2. There were even suggestions that aile­ 
rons could be dispensed with altogether, to be 
replaced by wingtip spoilers for lateral control. Flaps 
then could extend from root to tip. The whole idea of 
the Standard Class originally was to produce a safe, 
practical and relatively inexpensive sailplane with a 
good enough performance for distance flights and 
competitions with other aircraft of similar per­ 
formance. Reichmann himself made the point that the 
repeated rule changes had done serious harm.
The CIW thought again. At the delegates' meeting in 
March 1975 the Standard (lass rules were put back to 
where they had been, but at the same time an entirely
249

--- PAGE 252 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
new class, the unrestricted lorn or, as it was immedi­ 
ately termed in illogical popular parlance, the Racing 
Class, was announced. (Illogical because all modem 
gliding competitions are races.) It was believed that 
the unrestricted 15m class would become most 
popular, surpassing even the Open Class in prestige. 
What might emerge in the way of complications and 
expensive machinery remained to be seen. The new 
rules were to take effect after the next World 
Championships in June 1976.
George Burton was full of enthusiasm for the