 new 
class. In the 11)76 World Championships he flew the 
Finnish designed Pik 20 (with flaps as permitted under 
the 11)74 rules) to third place in the Standard Class, and 
beat many of the large Open Class sailplanes when 
flying against them on the same courses. He broke the 
world record for distance over a triangular course with 
a flight of 720km (446 miles). Immediately after return­ 
ing from Finland he made a proposal to his chairman, 
Sir Leonard Redshaw, for the design of a new 15m 
sailplane using a carbonfibre spar and new combined 
flap-airbrakes which he had outlined in talks with the 
Glasfliigel company the previous year. (This ingenious 
flap design was incorporated in the Cilasfliigel 
Mosquito.) The fuselage would be based on the 
Kestrel, but without the excessive waisting which had 
caused so much aerodynamic trouble. Redshaw, now 
in his last year before retirement, agreed funding of 
£250,000 for the project. The technical department 
estimated the aircraft would be ready for test flying 
within one year.
Slingsby's accordingly announced the Type-65 Vega. 
Deliveries were promised for June 1977. More capital 
was invested in tooling than for any other British 
sailplane, in an effort to keep the labour costs down.
During 1976 a whole new crop of 15m Racing Class 
sailplanes appeared. They were based on the old 
breed, often using the same fuselages and tail units but 
with new wing profiles and flaps, ailerons coupled. The 
Mosquito and LS-3 (a much more sensible design than 
the LS-2) were German, and from Finland came the 
PIK 20D, which had a carbon fibre spar. All of these 
were available before the end of the year. The ASW 20 
from Schleicher came on the market in 1977, and the 
Grob Speed Astir, the Glaser-Dirks DG 200 and the 
Schempp-Hirth Mini Nimbus soon followed.
The Slingsby Vega was the first sailplane ever to be 
designed from the outset for a carbonfibre main wing 
spar, stronger and stiffer yet lighter than glass. The PIK 
20D had inherited a 17 per cent thick wing root from 
the 20B, so was not taking full advantage of the new 
material. The Vega wing was 15 per cent thick through­ 
out. The Wort maim profiles were similar to those of the 
Kestrel and all the other contest sailplanes of the 
period. Balsa wood was no longer used for the filling of 
the sandwich skins, having been replaced by plastic 
foam. There were, of course, flaps with ailerons 
coupled to vary the camber across the whole span.
For landing, the entire trailing edge inboard of the 
ailerons, earning the flaps, pivoted to present nearly
vertical airbrake surfaces both above and below the 
wing. In normal flight the flaps could be moved inde­ 
pendently for slow and fast flying. Burton had his own 
ideas about the mechanism, but had long arguments 
with the company's technical director and was finally 
convinced that the loads did not have balanced paths 
through the structure. An acceptable solution was 
found but it was complicated and seemed likely to 
create maintenance problems in the future.
Pilots were used to having two separate levers; one 
for the flap, another for the brakes. In the Vega one 
lever operated both controls. In the forward position 
the flaps could be drooped or raised as required for 
general flying. For landing, the lever was brought back 
through a gate and the full brake was available. The 
system gave some trouble in the prototype and was 
modified several times. In the final arrangement the 
flap settings were varied by moving the lever in a rotary 
sense, a spring-loaded latch holding them in any 
desired position. For opening the brakes the lever was 
pulled fully back. From the pilot's viewpoint the 
system worked well.
An interesting point was that the glass skin on the 
upper side of the flap-brake was continuous, forming a 
perfect seal. As the flaps were moved up or down 
through their range of 8° either side of central, the 
glass skin adjacent to the hinges flexed. The only 
visible discontinuity in the wing surface was at the 
forward edge of the brakes.
Provision was made for 100kg (2201b) of water 
ballast in plastic bags inside the wings, as had become 
normal practice. The amount of ballast permitted in 
the Vega was subsequently increased to 160kg (3521b), 
about the weight of two extra pilots.
The fuselage front end and cockpit were based 
closely on the Kestrel. Indeed, the moulds were made 
from the same plug, but the somewhat too sudden 
contraction of the cross-section aft was smoothed out, 
avoiding flow separation. The canopy was in one piece, 
pivoted at the front and held open, when required, by a 
gas strut. An inflatable pneumatic seal, pumped up 
with a small hand bellows after closing the canopy, 
was provided. The landing wheel was large, also 
coming from the Kestrel and giving more ground clear­ 
ance and a higher ground angle of attack than any of 
the other 15m sailplanes. The fin and T tailplane used 
the latest rather thick but low-drag symmetrical pro­ 
files developed by Wortmann for such applications. 
The tailplane junction with the fin was particularly 
neat, a small section of the fin being permanently 
attached and faired to the tailplane so that there was 
no gap or leakage at the junction. A neat fairing closed 
the place at the top of the rudder where, on most other 
sailplanes, there was an awkward air trap. A little drag 
was saved by making the tailwheel retractable.
There were many other good features of detail. 
George Burton wrote and said on many occasions that 
there could be no vast margin in performance over the 
rival racing class aircraft, all of which were using 
similar wings, similar fuselages and of course had the
250

--- PAGE 253 ---
T-65, VEGA
same span. The combined effect of all the small 
improvements would make the difference. At the same 
time the cockpit was slightly larger and the tailplane a 
little greater in area, so the Vega would be more 
comfortable to sit in for long flights and more stable.
'Vega is cleana', 'safa', 'lighta', a 'betta glida', the 
advertisements said. Everything about the new 
sailplane looked good, and about 50 were ordered even 
before the prototype had flown. Vega was 'a generation 
ahead of its competitors', or was expected to be so 
when in production. The first flight took place early in 
June 1977, the month in which customers had origi­ 
nally been led to expect delivery.
Sir Leonard Redshaw retired and a new chairman 
took charge of Vickers-Slingsby.
Flight certification had to be completed and a lot 
remained to be done after the preliminary air tests. At 
the most forward position of the e.g. elevator authority 
was lacking. Further modifications of the flap-brake 
system proved necessary. Burton felt that everything 
must be completely right before he could deliver 
sailplanes to waiting customers, but the technical 
department of the company was greatly preoccupied 
and there were delays. The first production batch, it 
was now said, would be ready in the spring of 1978.
Most of the work going on at Vickers-Slingsby at this 
time was to do with marine engineering. The last of 
four miniature glass-plastic submarines was approach­ 
ing completion, a one-man deep-sea diving apparatus 
was under development, and there was much going on 
in associated electronics. Equipment for naval 
minesweepers ranging from washbasins to engine 
mountings was being made. A gondola for a small 
airship was built and an order for 15 wooden T-61 
(Scheibe Falke) motor-gliders for the ATC was filled.
As a result of a bargain between British Aerospace 
and the Romanian Government, the BAG One-Eleven 
airliner was to be built under licence by the ICA air­ 
craft factory at Brasov and motor-gliders and 
sailplanes produced by ICA were to be sold in the UK. 
Vickers asked Slingsby to undertake this agency. 
Although the price was low, the IS-28M2 motor-glider, 
shown at Farnborough, was not easy to handle in a 
crosswind take-off and Burton was not impressed. The 
IS-28 and 29 Brasov all-metal sailplanes proved quite 
popular and, coming from a state subsidised factory, 
were offered at a good price on the British market.
The Vega, it seemed, was in danger of being 
squeezed out of the Slingsby works altogether. In 
March 1978 there was still only one complete, with a 
few pre-production fuselage shells waiting for wings 
and tails. Derek Piggott flew the prototype a few times 
briefly and reported favourably though cautiously.
The World Championships, held every two years, are 
important occasions for sailplane manufacturers to 
demonstrate their wares and to have them thoroughly 
tested under severe conditions. On the ground, quick 
rigging and de-rigging after outlandings are necessary, 
and aerial racing goes on in all the variety of weather 
conditions that can appear during a couple of weeks.
In July 1978 the great meeting was at Chateauroux in 
France. The Racing Class contest was won by Helmut 
Reichmann, flying a very special aircraft from the 
Brunswick Akaflieg. The SB 11 had huge flaps which 
not only changed the camber but also increased the 
total wing area for soaring and retracted entirely for 
high-speed flight, It was an expensive, heavy aircraft 
and not easy to fly. It looked as if the rulemakers had 
once again created a monster. Reichmann himself 
wrote afterwards that the CIW needed to think yet 
again.
The Vega was at last said to be ready, but not for 
contest flying, and the British team could not use it. 
The second off the production line was brought to 
Chateauroux only for demonstration. There were signs 
of hasty preparation. Unlike the other sailplanes, 
which had the usual moulded gelcoat exterior, the 
Vega had an acrylic spray-painted finish. In places 
there were paint runs that had not been rubbed down, 
which, whether or not they had any important effect on 
the boundary layer, did not impress those who 
inspected the aircraft. The ailerons hinge gap was 
unsealed. The Vega was flown by a good many people 
and was well liked on the whole, though the rate of roll 
was rather less than desirable, the unsealed ailerons 
feeling rather spongy. It was difficult to assess all- 
round performance while the competing aircraft were 
far away on task, but as one of those who tried it 
remarked, 'with the proverbial ha'porth of tar it should 
be a very good ship'. For much of the fortnight the Vega 
was left tied down outside. It was hard to avoid con­ 
cluding that the Vickers-Slingsby company was not 
very interested in what happened to it. The Vega was 
now well over a year late in reaching production and 
the market was melting away.
Meanwhile, George Burton had taken the first proto­ 
type to important competitions at Hahnweide in 
Germany, and in June, at the invitation of Slingsby's 
American agent Duane Sprague, he agreed to fly at the 
US Nationals. Delays in preparing his Vega for this 
event were such that the sailplane had to be air­ 
freighted to San Francisco. From there, arrangements 
for Sprague to crew for him having fallen apart, Burton 
by himself was obliged to tow the glider in its trailer to 
Ephrata in Washington State. He was further delayed 
for two days by long arguments with his new company 
chairman over the transatlantic telephone. Too late for 
the start of the competition and without a proper crew, 
he nevertheless flew some of the tasks against the 
latest German aircraft. On one occasion he beat 
George Moffatt, the eventual winner in an ASW 20, 
round a 300km triangle, so the Vega was obviously a 
good performer, but there was criticism from the 
knowledgeable Americans of the smoothness and 
finish of the wings. The good results were attributed to 
Burton's well recognised skill, not to the Vega.
After these experiences Burton was forced to admit 
that the Vega was about 3 per cent worse in the glide 
than the ASW-20 and LS-3. Standards of wing profile 
accuracy at Kirbymoorside were not yet good enough.
251

--- PAGE 254 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
There was no other explanation for the apparent dis­ 
advantage in performance, for, as he had said before, 
there was little difference on paper between any of the 
Racing Class sailplanes at this time.
Soon after his return to Kirbymoorside, Burton pre­ 
sented the works manager with a copy of the German 
specification for the waviness of sailplane wing sur­ 
faces. His staff apparently knew something that he had 
not yet been told. The manager bluntly remarked that 
there was no intention of trying to meet such stan­ 
dards. It was clear that Burton s time at Slingsby was at 
an end. On 13 September 1978, after a final very brief 
interview with the chairman, he left the company. 
Nobody in the gliding movement was very surprised. 
Burton felt he had been made a scapegoat for produc­ 
tion delays and defects in the Vega for which he was 
not responsible. His position was filled by Jim Tucker, 
a graduate aeronautical engineer who had joined 
Slingsby's in 1967, and had been technical director and 
lately marketing director of the offshore engineering 
division.
Outstanding orders for the Vega had not been met, 
but full production began at last and faithful promises 
of delivery in 11)79 seemed likely to be kept. Late in 
April an open day was held at Slingsby, 'designed to 
repair the company's reputation with the UK soaring 
movement, which had become somewhat tattered 
during the three years of delays and disappointments 
from when the Vega was first announced'. Three Vegas 
were made available for flying and 17 had already been 
delivered to buyers, five of these in the I'SA. They were 
coming off the line at the rate of one a week. But, with 
rather ominous implications, Tucker said: 'as long as 
our aerospace activities continue to be profitable, 
there is no cause for winding them up'.
On the same occasion it was announced that there 
was to be a simplified, cheaper version, the Sport Vega, 
with flaps deleted and fixed undercarriage. Production 
capacity for 48 Racing Class and 12 Sport Class Vegas 
per year existed. A self-launching Vega was also pro­ 
jected. Interest revived, but in mid-1979 there came yet 
another change of ownership. Vickers at this time had 
an overdraft of more than £11 million and was under 
pressure from corporate shareholders to reduce it. 
Interest in acquiring the Kirbymoorside factory was 
shown by a company providing diving services to the 
North Sea oil industry, for whom Slingsby had made 
submarine equipment. The development costs of the 
Vega were set off against taxation and the company 
was sold, to be renamed Slingsby Engineering Ltd.
During 197! > there were competitions in Europe and 
the USA in which the Vega was able to show its paces. 
The reports coming from the pilots were not especially 
enthusiastic. Wally Scott, a former American cham­ 
pion, said h<> found that the Vega would climb well but 
lost to the German aircraft in the faster glides, which 
Burton had admitted a year before. Scott admired 
many of the smaller features, and it was agreed that the 
aircraft handled well and was comfortable and very 
pleasiint to fly. Scott concluded: The Vega may prove
to be the most costly 15m ship of the lot, but ... it may 
be well worth it'. It was not at all clear what benefits 
the customer would gain by paying more. The contem­ 
porary German Racing Class sailplanes were also 
comfortable, handled well and performed slightly 
better. Scott welcomed the news that more ballast 
would be permitted in the Vega, which might produce 
the extra performance needed at high speed, but the 
fundamental problem of the wing surface accuracy 
was not addressed.
Very bad news came in August, Baar Selen, a Dutch 
pilot who had won the Standard Class championship at 
Chateauroux, entered his new Vega in competitions at 
Rieti in Italy. Flying at 120kt in moderately calm air, the 
Vega broke up. Selen used his parachute and escaped 
unhurt. There followed an intense technical investiga­ 
tion. The stressing calculations were checked and re- 
checked and Vega wings were subjected to renewed 
mechanical testing up to the ultimate negative and pos­ 
itive bending and under torsional loads equivalent to 
flight at 150kt. The first distressing discovery was that 
a batch of the steel wing root spigots, supplied to 
Slingsby by a subcontractor, had not been correctly 
heat treated, and these failed during the tests. All Vegas 
were grounded until those with faulty steel were 
found. The spigots were replaced at the expense of the 
contractor, who admitted liability.
But the spigots were not the cause of Selen s acci­ 
dent. The port wing had broken off about a metre out­ 
board of the fuselage; the carbon spar itself had failed. 
More testing was done, and many spars were made and 
loaded without failures. Photographs were taken and 
eventually published showing a Vega wing on test bent 
like an archer's bow at full draw without breaking. At 
the end of all this it was still not entirely clear why the 
accident happened, although there was a suspicion 
that the aircraft had been overstressed during earlier 
stages of the day's racing, flying too fast in rough air. 
George Burton himself subsequently wondered if the 
the cause was, after all, wing flutter. The combination 
of a very stiff carbon spar with more elastic glass skins, 
as on the Kestrel 22, might have been responsible. 
More computing at last suggested that some slight rein­ 
forcement of the mainspar was sufficient. All existing 
Vegas were so modified and there was no further 
trouble.
Such a series of events coming after years of frustra­ 
tions and delays did not help the Vega's reputation. It 
was not a cheap sailplane, and it had no measurable 
advantage, indeed some small deficiency, in per­ 
formance. Production continued on a very limited 
scale to satisfy those few orders that had not been can­ 
celled.
The Sport Vega prototype made its first flight in the 
spring of 1980, and was warmly praised by Derek 
Piggott after he had flown it. It was, he said, the best 
thing for many years, a relatively simple aircraft with 
excellent handling and robust construction, low main­ 
tenance costs and with a satisfactory performance for 
club flying and minor competitions, but there were
252

--- PAGE 255 ---
T-65, VEGA
plenty of rivals in the market for this type of aircraft.
The total of all Vegas and Sport Vegas built was 70. 
From an accountant's viewpoint, a minimum of 100 
might have represented the break-even point. The 
company now was taking another direction. A further 
order for 25 T-61E Venture powered gliders came from 
the ATC, and an agreement was reached for building, 
under licence, the Foumier RF 6, a French two-seat 
light aeroplane. This entered production in 1981. Soon 
it was completely redesigned for fibre-reinforced 
plastic materials, and as the T-67 Firefly became an out­ 
standingly successful product, in its latest form still in 
production in 1995 and exported widely. Slingsby 
Aircraft Ltd, after yet another name change, at last 
reaped the rewards of the experience gained with the 
new materials.
In 1982 it was announced that Slingsby was ceasing 
all glider production. It was not surprising news, 
although it was very sad. The gliding side of the busi­ 
ness had made no profits since the late 1960s. The 
home market was said to be too small to support a 
local company in this very specialised business. An 
influx of cheap gliders from state-owned factories in 
Eastern Europe was also blamed, but it was not 
Romanian, Polish or Czechoslovakian manufacturers 
who captured the international market for high-perfor­ 
mance sailplanes. In the affluent west there were 
plenty of pilots willing to pay high prices for per­ 
formance gains of one or two percent. It was German 
factories and young men trained in the Akafliegs of 
German universities who prevailed, and in 1996 they 
still do so.
T-65 Vega data
Dimensions 
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a. 
Wing sections 
Root
Tip
15.00m (49.2ft) 
10.05m2 (108.2ft2) 
2Z4 
6.72m (22ft)
Wortmann FX 67-K-15 (15 per cent
flap)
Wortmann FX 67-K-15 (15 per cent
flap)
Weights 
Tare 
Flying 
Ballasted 
Wing loading
236kg (520b) 
331kg(730b) 
508kg (1,120b)
30.5kg/m2 (6.2b/ft2) to 50.5kg/m2 
(10.35b/ft2) 
Flap movement: up max. 8°, down (normal) 8 °.
Sport Vega
Dimensions
As for Vega but no flaps, no water ballast, non-retract­ 
ing wheel.
Weights 
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
236kg (520b) 
354kg (780b) 
352kg/m2 (7.2b/ft2)
The Sport Vega cockpit. (M. Simons)
Apart from the lively paintwork, representing the constella­ 
tion Lyra, with Vega its brightest member, this photograph 
shows the lifting handle and non-retracting tailwheel of the 
Sport Vega. (M. Simons)
253

--- PAGE 256 ---
The Vega prototype in flight. The fuselage was particularly 
clean, with both main and tailwheels retracted. (Vickers- 
Slingsby)
The Vega at Chateauroux in 1978. (M. Simons)
A Sport Vega at Lasham in 1992. (M. Simons)

--- PAGE 257 ---
T-65, VEGA
The Vega prototype flown by Derek Piggott

--- PAGE 258 ---
References
Books
Airborne Forces Experimental Establishment Report
G48, Departmental Note N. :37 
Ash, A., Gliding in Australia (Hudson, Melbourne,
Ash well Cooke, J. R., Motorless Flight (J. Hamilton,
London, 19:32) 
B.G.A. No 1 Test group, Handling tests of a Kite 2
glider 10.11.51 
Butler, P., British Gliders (Merseyside Aviation
Society, 1970, second ed. 1975) 
Gumming, M., The Powerless Ones (Muller, London,
1966) 
Devlin, Gerald M. Silent Wings (W. H. Alien, London,
1985) 
Ellison, 
N., 
British 
Gliders 
and 
Sailplanes
1922-1970 (A& C. Black, London, 1971) 
Flanders, L. H. & Carr, C. F., Gliding and Motorless
Flight (Pitman, London, 1930) 
Geen, F, The ABC of Gliding (Alien & Unwin,
London, 1952) 
Goodyear, H. R. R., Gliding 1931 Yearbook (Dorset
Gliding Club, 1931) 
Heydon, G. A. M., Flights in NSW with Slingsby Gull
(typescript), 1945. 
Lippisch, A., Bin Dreieck Fliegt (Motorbuch Verlag,
Stuttgart, 1976) 
Ministry of Aircraft Production Ref. Non. Res/Acft.
7771/RDT2(d) Specification No. TX8/45 
Ministry of Supply AFEE Report T-65 
Mrazek, J. E., Fighting Gliders of World War II
(Robert Hale Ltd., London, 1977) 
( KSTIV The World's Sailplanes Vol. 1 1958, Vol. 2 1963 
Piggott, Derek, Delta Papa (Pelham Books, London,
1977) 
Riedel, 
P. Uber Sonnige Weiten (Motorbuch,
Stuttgart, 1985) 
Schweizer, Paul, Wings Like Eagles, (Smithsonian
I nst. Press. 1988) 
Scott, Peter, The Eye of the Wind (Hodder &
Stoughton, London, 1961) 
Simons. 
M. The 
World's Vintage 
Sailplanes
(Kookaburra, Melbourne, 1086)
Slingsby, F. N. in The Gliding Book (Eds Serjeant &
Watson, Kaye, London, 1965) 
Stamer, F. & Lippisch, A., Gliding and Sailplaning
(Lane, London, 1930) 
Thetford, O, Aircraft of the Fighting Powers Vol.
VII, Harborough, Leicester, 1946) 
Wills, P. A., On Being a Bird (Max Parrish, London,
1953)
Welch, Ann, Happy to Fly (Murray, London, 1983) 
Wood, Alan, History of the World's Glider Forces
(Patrick Stephens, Northants, 1990) 
Wright, L. The Wooden Sword (Elek Books, London,
1967)
Periodicals
Aero pi ft ne Monthly
The Aeroplane
Aircraft Engineering
Australian Gliding
Flight
Flight International
Gliding 1950-55, thereafter Sailplane and Gliding
Gliding Kiwi
OSTIV Publications
Sailplane and Glider 1931-1955 thereafter Sailplane
a}id Gliding 
Sailplane and Gliding 
Soaring (USA)
Journal of the Royal Aeronautical Society 
VGCNews
Personal communications
Harry Bache, Geoff Bailey-Woods, G. Bromley, R. 
Burns, George Burton, D. Carswell, Chris Coxon, 
Michael Eacock, Anthony Edwards, Peter J. V. Elliott, 
Norman Ellison, Alan Giles, Ron W. Helm, Harold 
Holdsworth, Frank G. living, Brennig James, R. C. M. 
King (Ministry of Defence), Peter Layne (NZ GSA), 
Eoin MacDonald, Ross Macintyre, Robert J. Martin, B. 
A. Meulbrouck, Alec O'Connor, Derek Piggott, R. Read, 
Barry Rolfe (BGA), Harry Schneider, the late John 
Stanley Sproule, G. Terry, Mervyn Waghorn, Peter M. 
Warren, John Williamson, Christopher Wills.
256

--- PAGE 259 ---
The Author
Martin Simons began gliding in 1947 and 
has been involved with the sport ever 
since. He has about 1,500 hours soaring 
time and is still active as a pilot. He has a 
strong interest in designing, building and 
flying model aircraft.
After completing national service with 
the RAF he attended college and 
university in London and has held a 
number of teaching posts. In 1968 he 
emigrated to South Australia to teach at 
Adelaide University. From 1970 to 1980 
he edited Australian Gliding.
Airlife Publishing Ltd
101 Longden Road 
Shrewsbury SY3 9EB 
England
ISBN 1 853107328

--- PAGE 260 ---
Type 2 fuselage
was entirely skinned
with plywood
I \csrn
ISBN 1-85310-732-8
9 "781853"107320
