eavy, fast 
aircraft, so-called 'lead sleds', had to struggle to keep 
up while the lighter gliders made better progress 
across-country. Even so, by British standards the HP- 
14 was not a lightweight. The wing loading of 28kg/m2 
(5.751b/ft~) was 20 per cent more than that of the Dart 
17. The trend towards higher loadings with better wing 
profiles was becoming accepted, and the new Schreder 
design looked like a good compromise.
Slingsby had decided to build metal sailplanes. With 
its simple structure and ease of construction, it 
seemed they could hardly do better than to undertake 
the manufacture of the HP-14 under licence using, in 
the first instance, kits supplied from America. It would 
give them in the shortest possible time a product that 
would be competitive in price and performance with 
German, Swiss and Polish sailplanes, and they would 
gain valuable experience with metal structures. It was 
anticipated that, after the first few aircraft, all the nec­ 
essary components would be made in England.
An agreement was reached with Schreder and the 
first two kits arrived at Kirbymoorside early in 1967, 
Schreder himself coming too, to advise and supervise 
the early stages of assembly. At the same time a third 
kit went to Ken Fripp's Southdown Aero Services at 
Lasham. The intention was to have the two Slingsby 
aircraft completed in time for the British Nationals at 
the end of May, Schreder to fly one hors conconrs and 
John Williamson the other. The Southdown example 
was being built for Peter Scott. No Slingsby type 
number was allocated.
The HP-14 with a span of 16.7m (.r>4.8ft), had a simple 
tapered wing, using the Wortmann FX 61-163 profile 
with a slight modification at the trailing edge as 
explained below. A 16.3 per rent-thick wing, compared 
with the 18 and even 20 per rent-thick profiles seen in
229

--- PAGE 232 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
previous Slingsby products, was claimed to be an 
important advantage made possible only because of 
the metal structure. The mainspar flanges were cut 
from 1A inch thick 2024 T6 alloy. The large metal plates 
were rolled to produce a slight chordwise curve con­ 
forming to the wing profile. They then required cutting 
longitudinally to produce the spar flanges, whereupon 
the metal tended to spring into a curve. Straightening 
required careful hand work with a ball pane hammer. 
The pressed ribs were riveted in front and behind to 
the spar webs. There was a light rear spar of C section. 
The ailerons were hinged to the top flange of this spar, 
the flaps to the bottom. The whole wing was skinned in 
sheet metal with countersunk rivets. The 3.6m(12ft) 
wide metal sheets for the skin had to be bent to 
conform to the leading-edge radius. This was done by a 
band of five or six persons with one edge of the sheet 
under their feet (protected), pulling the other edge up 
and over to make the initial bend. Then, with the aid of 
a long, heavy plank of wood they stood or even jumped 
up and down to tighten the bend until it was close 
enough to the correct radius. Unlikely as it sounds, this 
worked quite well.
To the British pilots the most unusual feature of the 
wing was that, instead of parallel ruler-type airbrakes, 
flaps along the entire trailing edge of the wing inboard 
of the ailerons were made to hinge down to 90°. For 
landing, such flaps proved excellent. Having chosen a 
field, the pilot could lower the flaps fully at a suitable 
height on the final approach. The increase in drag was 
very great. Airspeed was maintained by adopting a 
steep attitude, about 4r>0 nose-down to maintain 50kt. 
On Founding out, the speed rapidly decayed and a very 
short landing run was the result. The proviso was that, 
if the pilot was undershooting, it was dangerous to 
raise the flaps suddenly to the neutral position because 
this precipitated a sudden loss of lift and a very high 
rate of descent. It was shown, however, that between 
about 70° and full deflection the wing lift coefficient 
hardly changed, whereas the drag varied considerably, 
so a badly judged approach could be adjusted by 
moving the flaps between 70° and 90 . In practice it 
was easier to land an HP-14 in a small field than almost 
any other comparable sailplane. By using flaps of this 
kind the complications of housing airbrakes inside the 
wing, with all the required cut-outs, seals, rods and 
bellcranks to drive them, were avoided.
For thermalling, the flaps could be lowered from 
neutral slightly, allowing tighter turns, and for high­ 
speed 'penetrating' dashes through sinking air to the 
next thermal they could be raised 10° to reduce drag. 
They were not interconnected with the ailerons, so 
these remained in their normal position as the flaps 
went up or down.
Strictly the 61-1 (>3 profile has a slight concave cusp 
on the underside at the rear, but to form this accurately 
while preserving structural simplicity in the flaps and 
ailerons was difficult. Schreder made the last few per 
cent of the profile flat underneath. The control sur­ 
faces could then be made in the easiest possible
manner by twice folding appropriately sized metal 
sheets and riveting the extreme trailing edges together 
to form a triangular-section tube, with small riblets at 
each end. The loss of performance was very slight. The 
mainspars were joined on the aircraft centreline with 
two large horizontal pins through inter-digitating 
aluminium alloy fittings, and the fuselage was attached 
by four further pins at the main and rear spars. The 
flaps were driven from the extreme root end by a 
torque tube carrying a triangular arm extension which 
engaged inside the root of the flap as the wings were 
rigged.
The wings were attached at shoulder level to the 
fuselage, which was very simple in outline, the only 
double curvature in the skins being in the nose. The 
rest was a conical metal tube of oval cross-section with 
pressed formers and flush-riveted skins. The cockpit 
canopy was also very simple, the most forward portion 
being a curved sheet of transparent plastic. The rear 
section, hinged at the side for access, was a simple 
moulding. There was a large retracting main wheel and 
a steerable tailwheel linked to the rudder pedals. The 
control column was orthodox. The flaps were driven 
by a rack and pinion with a large handle. Several full 
turns of the handle were required to lower the flaps 
fully, but all the necessary adjustments during the 
landing approach could be done within one turn.
Because of the very successful Austria and SHK 
sailplanes, V tails were already familiar, but the stan­ 
dard HP-14 tail areas looked very small by comparison 
with the surfaces of the SHK. Recovery from inadver­ 
tent spins had proved difficult in a few V-tailed gliders, 
and the effectiveness of the small tail areas in a cross- 
wind take-off also worried some pilots. Schreder was 
entirely confident of his aircraft, but the first one from 
Slingsby's after test flights was given much larger tail 
surfaces. Linkage of the ruddervators with the controls 
was, supposedly, automatic. For carriage by road the 
two elements of the V tail, after disconnecting the 
lower spar flanges from the fuselage cross-frame, were 
raised to the vertical position and strapped together. 
The elevator control linkage did not disengage when 
this was done, so to rig the tail it was necessary only to 
lower each surface and insert the bottom pins.
The Slingsby aircraft had a powerful hydraulic 
wheel brake operated by pushing with both feet 
together on the rudder pedals. Also on the first 
Slingsby HP-14, for various reasons, the flap rack and 
pinion drive was not used, a simple lever being 
adopted. With this arrangement the full 90° flap deflec­ 
tion was not possible, and a 'one-shot' tail parachute 
was fitted for landing. (The parachute was a standard 
item of equipment from a Folland Gnat jet aircraft.) 
This prevented the installation of the steering tail- 
wheel. Schreder himself retained the original arrange­ 
ment for the second Slingsby example.
The first flight in Yorkshire was made in May 1967, 
and John Williamson flew the HP-14 for the first time 
only three days before he was due to use it in the 
National Championships. Schreder's aircraft arrived
23O

--- PAGE 233 ---
SLINGSBY SCHREDER HP-14
even later. After flying Schreder's machine the day 
before the competition began, Williamson had his flaps 
hurriedly modified overnight to the standard rack-and- 
pinion drive, and the tail parachute was removed. As a 
result of this alteration, which required an all-night 
working session by Geoff Bailey-Woods, there was a 
desperate rush to get the HP-14 into its front-row posi­ 
tion on the starting grid for the first competition take- 
off. The crew were actually still rigging the V tail as the 
aircraft was being towed out to the launch point. This 
almost precipitated a serious accident. When the tail 
surfaces were in the vertical position the controls did 
not disengage, but as the HP-14 was rolling along, 
rocking slightly from side to side and being rigged at 
the same time, one of the surfaces was allowed to 
move beyond the usual 'at rest' vertical alignment. The 
ruddervator linkage became disengaged and did not re­ 
engage as the surface was lowered and locked in flying 
position. The standard cockpit check just before take- 
off did not reveal the disconnection because the 
surface moved normally, resting by its own weight 
against the drive though it was not actually being 
driven.
Williamson, on tow, had no control and experienced 
a wild ground loop, finding himself airborne and travel­ 
ling sideways before skidding for 10m (30ft) along the 
ground. It was a thoroughly ignominious and danger­ 
ous start to the British contest career of the HP-14. 
Fortunately only slight damage was done, the wingtip 
skid plate being ripped off and a dent being made in the 
nose. With the plate pop-riveted on again, the HP-14 
was able to fly after all in the first contest task. After 
this Williamson was very pleased with it. The weather 
was not particularly good, only four days being scored 
in the whole Championships. Williamson, by now 
getting used to the sailplane, won the last day, but 
placed 10th overall against the wooden opposition. 
Schreder, hors concours, was placed 18th in the unfa­ 
miliar British conditions.
Later in the year Peter Scott took delivery of his own 
HP-14 from Lasham and flew it competitively for the 
first time at the London Regionals in August. In this 
contest he came fourth, being beaten by some wooden 
sailplanes (including Carr Withall's Skylark 4, Alf 
Warminger's Dart 17 and a Ka 6E flown by the author). 
The absolute performances were somewhat obscured 
because handicapping factors were applied to the air­ 
craft, but the HP-14 did not impress the assembled 
pilots greatly. The ground crew found it troublesome to 
rig and christened it the 'Iron Lady'. Scott won the 
Western Regionals with his HP-14 in June the following 
year.
Problems now emerged with certification. To permit 
an experimental aircraft to be flown in competitions by 
experienced pilots was one thing, but to issue a general 
type approval was another matter. By the end of 1967 
the BGA Technical Committee reported not that the 
certification was imminent, but that: This type is now 
being developed into a definitive version and we will 
soon be concerned with the certification'. No one
doubted that the HP-14 was structurally sound and 
strong, but this had to be proved, which meant there 
had to be a good deal of calculation and paperwork. 
Schreder himself relied mainly on experience and had 
almost no figures to show. Both of the HP-14s built 
from Schreder's kits were sent for sale to the USA, 
where they were readily accepted under the official 
'experimental' category there. The tail surfaces of 
Williamson's example were replaced by the normal 
smaller ones.
Slingsby's aircraft division was now extremely busy 
and perhaps overloaded. Production of the T-53 two- 
seater and the Cameo V-Liner aerial hoarding were pro­ 
ceeding. Tipsy Nipper light aeroplanes were being built 
and kits for them sold. Replica S.E.SAs were being 
made for filming, the Swallow sailplane was in produc­ 
tion, the motorised Capstan was being developed and 
two special versions of the Standard Class Dart 15, 
with Wortmann wing profiles, were being built for the 
next World Championships, scheduled for Poland in 
June 1968. Alongside there was production of poly­ 
ester/glass components for bathrooms.
Also for Poland, Slingsby was committed to the pro­ 
duction of two advanced sailplanes for the Open Class. 
As most of the other pilots in this category would be 
flying large glass sailplanes, the most obvious expedi­ 
ent was to improve the performance of the HP-14 by 
stretching the span to 18m. This could be achieved by 
adding three extra rib bays to each tip, extending the 
metal skins and adding glass-polyester wingtip mould­ 
ings. This entailed removal of the aileron mass-bal­ 
ances, which, on Schreder's original, had been 
attached at the outermost end of the control surface, 
outboard of the tip skid plate. To improve handling 
with the larger span, the tail unit was redesigned with a 
large vertical fin and rudder and an all-moving 
tailplane. Changes to the rest of the aircraft were kept 
to the minimum. Schreder actually fitted a pair of the 
18m wings to his original HP-14 for this World 
Championships.
In Britain, unlike some other countries, it was legal 
to fly in cloud providing the sailplane was suitably 
certificated. Loss of control in blind flight was a well 
recognised danger, the usual outcome being an 
increasingly steep spiral dive with rapidly rising air­ 
speed, very high g forces and serious structural col­ 
lapse. It had been decided long before that a sailplane 
approved for cloud flying must have airbrakes which, 
when fully open, would restrict the airspeed to the 
maximum permitted in rough air. It would be very diffi­ 
cult to sell the HP-14C on the home market without a 
cloud-flying airworthiness certificate. The flaps cer­ 
tainly limited the speed once they were fully down, as 
Williamson proved in his own test flying, but, if the air­ 
speed was already high and rising, the effort required 
from the pilot to get the flaps down to 90° was too 
great, If the sailplane was genuinely going out of 
control in cloud, the flap brakes would be useless.
During the next months Slingsby worked on the III>- 
14C to surmount this problem. Various expedients
231

--- PAGE 234 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
were tried, the addition of a simple bungee spring 
proving very effective in reducing the loads for normal 
approach and landing. To achieve full flap at high air­ 
speeds a compressed-air system was devised. This 
relied on a high-pressure air bottle which had to be 
pumped up before take-off, and pneumatic jacks to 
drive the flaps down against the aerodynamic resis­ 
tance When the flaps were needed in an emergency 
the pilot could release air to the jacks and the flaps 
would go fully down at once. Enough pressure was put 
into the bottle before take-off to allow this to be done 
twice or thrice during any one flight. Checking the 
pressure gauge was added to the pre-flight checklist. 
Unfortunately, forcing the flaps down in this way at 
high airspeeds proved too much for the light secondary 
spar stmeture, and strengthening this member 
involved more complications.
The HP-14Cs were barely ready in time for Poland, 
and the first one out of the workshop was found to be 
virtually unflyable, unstable fore and aft and so touchy 
in pitch that it required the pilot's constant attention to 
prevent dangerous oscillations. It had to be rushed 
back to the factory for modifications. What had been a 
splendidly simple and easily maintained sailplane of 
modest wingspan threatened now to become some­ 
thing of a monster. The nose was lengthened and a 
geared anti-balance tab was added to the elevator. This 
increased the stick force per g enough to make the air­ 
craft steady in high-speed flight, although the stick 
loads could not be fully trimmed out at low speeds. 
Nick Goodhart, the chosen pilot, made only one cross­ 
country flight in it before the first contest day. His com­ 
ments in print before the competition started were 
guarded. The HP-14C, he said, had a veiy reasonable 
performance, which was faint praise. The ailerons 
were heavier than he liked, the rate of roll only ade­ 
quate. With Goodharts weight in the cockpit the 
sailplane was now neutrally stable in pitch. There was, 
he pointed out, a good deal of development work still 
to be done. Many adjustments had to be made in 
Poland in the urgent days just before the competition 
started. The other British entrant in this class, George 
Burton, decided not to fly the HP-14C provided for him, 
competing in a wooden SHK and coming a very cred­ 
itable 7th. Goodhart struggled on to 16th place, which 
was very good in the circumstances but not good 
enough. Schreder came 21st.
It was accepted that the performance of the 18m air­ 
craft in relation to its price was good, but the technical 
conclusions after this contest made sorrowful reading. 
Frank living wrote: The moral for Slingsby's is that the 
production aircraft must have better finishes and 
improved details. .. compressed air for operating the 
flaps at high speeds is simply not acceptable'. It was 
becoming, said team manager Ann Welch, 'sadly 
obvious that no longer could we fly British if we 
wanted to have any chance of winning'.
As well as some of Schreder's own kits shipped 
directly or through Slingsby as agent, sales of several 
IIP-14C kits had been made in advance of test flying.
One went to Joe Provins in Yorkshire. The small 
Sydney Soaring Club, a long-standing customer for 
Slingsby products, and another group in New South 
Wales ordered and paid for two HP-14C kits. There 
were long, unexplained delays. Enough parts arrived at 
last to enable construction to begin, but many neces­ 
sary components were not delivered. When ordering 
his kit, Provins had required a written assurance that a 
BGA type approval and Certificate of Airworthiness for 
the sailplane would be forthcoming. It was also the 
rule in Australia that an imported sailplane could be 
accepted by the Department of Civil Aviation (as it was 
then called) only if type approval was granted in the 
country of origin. Little progress towards certification 
had been made. Having already been told after the 
Polish experience that the type was not acceptable, 
Slingsby were now legally required to bring the HP-14C 
up to the necessary standard. Using the ex-Goodhart 
aircraft, Geoff Bailey-Woods was given carte blanche 
to do whatever was necessary. He removed the com­ 
pressed-air system, redesigned the trimmer and air­ 
brake drives and installed a drag parachute, carrying 
out the test flights during October and November 1968.
On Monday 18 November 1968 came the factory fire 
described in the previous chapter. The HP-14C which 
had been intended for George Burton to fly in Poland 
was destroyed. All of the jigs and tooling and parts for 
several more HP-14s were lost. The newly modified air­ 
craft however, had been de-rigged and put in its trailer 
outside the factory on the Saturday afternoon. After 
flying it during the day, Bailey-Woods found the avail­ 
able space rather scarce with the chairman's yacht and 
private aeroplane inside, so countermanded the 
instructions that had been given to the factory crew 
and left it outside. It therefore survived.
Provins continued work, but still lacked some parts 
of his kit. The company cut up the remaining HP-14C to 
obtain the missing components. Provins's aircraft was 
completed and test flown by Bailey-Woods in June 
1969, eventually being accepted by the BGA and regis­ 
tered.
Not so the two in Australia. The subsequent bank­ 
ruptcy of the company left these customers without 
many vital parts for wings and tails and no prospect of 
the rest of the kits ever being delivered. They were 
never recompensed. The two sailplanes were eventu­ 
ally fitted with Schreder's own design of T-tail, the 
required materials and parts being bought directly 
from Ohio. The full 18m-span Slingsby wingtips were 
retained. Permits to fly were eventually obtained after 
long bureaucratic procedures.
The NTew South Wales group's 18m span HP-14T 
broke up in clear air at 2,400m (8,000ft) during the 
Australian National Championships on 5 January 1972. 
The pilot, Jan Coolhaas, who had been flying at a 
moderate airspeed, saved himself by parachute. He had 
heard a loud bang, and the HP-14 entered a steepening 
spiral dive which he could not correct. After official 
investigation the cause was attributed to wing-aileron 
flutter which led quickly to fracture of the main fittings,
232

--- PAGE 235 ---
SLINGSBY SCHREDER HP-14
loss of control and complete disintegration of the wing. 
The fittings that failed, forged by another company 
under contract to Slingsby, were of a different design 
from Schreder's and may have been defective. 
Presumably the deletion of the aileron mass balance, 
about which Schreder had never been happy, was also 
partly responsible. The Sydney Soaring Club's HP-14T 
also experienced flutter on a subsequent occasion, but 
did not break up. This 18m aircraft was then cut down 
to the original 16.7m span and the mass balances were 
restored, after which it proved very satisfactory. This 
machine and several other HP-14s in the USA and 
others in Australia, some built from Schreder's kits or, 
in one case, entirely from scratch, remain in service.
HP-14 data
As all of the homebuilders discovered, by the time 
their sailplanes were finished and approved for flying 
they were out of date and no longer competitive with 
glass/plastic aircraft. The original HP-14 did not 
achieve the claimed 40:1 glide ratio. Flight measure­ 
ments published in the USA showed that a well-built 
and carefully maintained HP-14T, even with slightly 
extended wingspan of 17.4m, achieved a best glide 
ratio of 1:36.3. This figure was exactly the same as best 
glide measured for the old wooden Skylark 4, although 
the metal aircraft achieved the figure at an 8kt faster 
airspeed and was appreciably better than the Skylark 
at speeds above 70kt. The 15m glass Libelle was better 
than both of them.
HP-14
HP-14C
Dimensions 
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a. 
Wing sections: 
Root
Weights 
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
16.7m (54ft 9yzin)
12.85m 2 (138.3ft2)
21.6
7.254m (23ft9/2in)
Wortmann FX 61 -163 (modified) 
Wortmann FX 61 -163 (modified)
245kg (539lb) 
362.9kg (800b) 
28.1kg/m 2 (5.75lb/ft2)
Dimensions
Wingspan 
18m (59ft OXan)
Wing area 
13.58m 2 (146.21 ft2)
Aspect ratio 
233
Length o.a. 
7.28m (23ft 10/zin)
Wing sections, as for HP-14
Weights 
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
290.3kg (64Gb)
381kg(840lb)
28.1kg/m 2 (5.75lb/ft2)
The 18m-span HP-14C built from a Slingsby kit in New 
South Wales. The parts for the T-tail had to be supplied by 
Schreder in the USA. This flight was its last. The wing failed 
and broke up in the air. (T. Neuman)
The cockpit of the HP-14C. On the left is the pressure gauge 
for the pneumatic flap operating system and the necessary 
plumbing. The flap operating lever carried a button on the 
top which, when depressed, released air to the rams. 
(G. Bailey-Woods)
Building an HP-14 was not as easy as it appeared, although, 
as this picture shows, the wing structure was very simple. 
This example was built entirely from scratch in Adelaide by 
Harry and David Bache. (H. Bache)

--- PAGE 236 ---
r „ -*, 
* j~
Geoff Bailey-Woods prepares for take-off in the first 
Slingsby-built HP-14. At this stage there seemed to be no 
serious problems. (G. Bailey-Woods)
The HP-14C under test with Bailey-Woods in the cockpit. 
The aircraft proved a disappointment and production did not 
proceed. (G. Bailey-Woods)

--- PAGE 237 ---
SLINGSBY SCHREDER HP-14
The prototype Slingsby HP-14, built from a kit supplied by 
Schreder. Here it has the original small V-tail. (G. Bailey- 
Woods)
The enlarged tail unit of the HP-14 as flown by John 
Williamson in the National Championships. Incorrect rigging 
caused a spectacular ground loop on the first attempted 
take-off. (M. Simons)
The instrument panel and cockpit of the second Australian 
Slingsby HP-14C, from an incomplete kit. This was later cut 
down to the original span after a wing flutter incident. 
( T. Neuman)
The Slingsby HP-14 at the British National Championships, 
being towed out to the take-off point at Lasham. The tail sur­ 
faces are greatly enlarged. (M. Simons)
235

--- PAGE 238 ---
T 59G vertical 
tail area
in *k400-K400-K400*H400***400*K400*K400
l«- 
CO
Typical instrument panel
Oxygen
Root section
Wortmann FX 67 - K 17 
(Flap 17%)
T 59G wing 
extensions
T 59D series 2
and T - 59G
tail unit
Horizontal tail
area increased
by 25%
Rudder chord
increased
by 76 mm
Fabric
covering
-*- 630
T59A
Kestrel 17
wing
Slingsby
Type 59
Tip section
Wortmann FX 67 - K -15 
(Flap 15%)
Drawn by Martin Simons 1994

--- PAGE 239 ---
Type 59, Kestre
The financial collapse in 1969, a few months after the 
fire at the Slingsby factory, seemed likely to bring air­ 
craft production at Kirbymoorside to an end. In receiv­ 
ership for months, the factory was closed except for a 
few maintenance staff.
Sir Leonard Redshaw, chairman of the Vickers 
Shipbuilding group based at Barrow-in-Furness, was a 
keen glider pilot, and he had recognised that new 
materials were likely to be important in shipbuilding as 
well as in aviation. The Vickers Company, with a long 
tradition of building submarines, had already made 
some enquiries about the possibility of using GRP for 
pressure hulls. In Britain very little research had been 
done. There was no support from the Ministry of 
Defence, and some very limited experience reported 
from North America was discouraging. In aviation 
there was nothing at any British university or technical 
college that could be compared with the German 
Akafliegs (Academic Flying Groups), whose theoret­ 
ical design studies and research results were trans­ 
lated into actual aircraft.
Redshaw met Peter Scott, then Chairman of the 
BGA, at Lasham. Scott had discarded the disappointing 
all-metal HP-14 and was flying a German glass 
sailplane, the 18m BS-1 originally designed by Bjorn 
Stender of the Brunswick Akaflieg, now in production 
and marketed by the Glasfliigel factory at Schlattstall 
in Germany. In the Open Class British National 
Championships that year most of the competitors flew 
imported sailplanes, many of them of GRP construc­ 
tion. Any aspiring champion was forced to look over­ 
seas for a competitive aircraft, which Scott greatly 
regretted.
By now, experience with imported glass aircraft had 
convinced British pilots and engineers that their 
earlier hesitations over composite materials were 
unjustified, providing the new aircraft were flown with 
discretion. GRP sailplanes picked up speed very 
quickly with small nose-down changes of trim, or if 
camber-changing flaps were slightly raised there might 
be no perceptible nose-down pitch at all. The glide 
remained comparatively flat. This was a great advan­
tage in cross-country racing but required care in moni­ 
toring airspeeds. With much higher wing loadings and 
the wing tanks or bags full of water ballast, on a good 
soaring day the most efficient speed for flying through 
sinking air to reach the next thermal might easily be 
faster than the critical flutter speed.
Out of the informal talk at Lasham came a meeting 
later in the same week between Slingsby and Redshaw. 
The Slingsby company records for the previous five 
years were scrutinised. Among the papers Redshaw 
came across a recent offer from Eugen Hanle, pro­ 
prietor and chief engineer of the Glasfliigel Company, 
for Slingsby to take on the manufacture of his Kestrel 
under licence. Hanle had been one of the engineers pri­ 
marily responsible for designing and building the very 
first glass sailplane, the Phonix, in 1957, and the 
Kestrel was in production and proving very successful. 
(The author, living now in Australia, took delivery of 
the 18th off the production line late in 1969.) With 
Slingsby in receivership the offer could not be taken up 
when it was first made, but Redshaw saw the possibil­ 
ity of combining his two interests, submarines and 
sailplanes, bringing both shipbuilding and glider 
construction into the age of composite materials.
After discussion, the Slingsby factory and all of its 
assets were bought by Vickers. Redshaw took Bill 
Slater, Jim Tucker and George Burton with him to see 
Hanle. It was agreed after negotiation that if Slingsby 
were to continue building gliders under Vickers owner­ 
ship and control, Hanle would train some of the work­ 
force in glass-plastic methods of construction and 
either the Kestrel or the highly popular Standard 
Libelle could be built at Kirbymoorside. One of the 
conditions laid down by Hanle was that the Slingsby 
works must be managed by a competition glider pilot 
of international standing. Despite some success in 
regional contests, Redshaw was not in this category. 
Slingsby's would also be appointed agents for the 
importation and sale in Britain of other Glasfliigel 
sailplanes.
Few people in Britain were qualified both as cham­ 
pion glider pilots and aircraft engineers, but George
237

--- PAGE 240 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
Builon had won the nationals, had a secure place in the 
British International Team and had an honours degree 
in physics with flight research experience at 
Farnborough and years in the electronics industry. It 
seemed to Redshaw that he was ideal for the job, and 
he was persuaded, at the age of 38, to change career 
and become managing director of the new company, 
now to be known once again as Slingsby Sailplanes 
Ltd. Burton was already familiar with the Libelle, but 
flew the Kestrel at Schlattstall. The Kestrel seemed to 
have the better prospects for development and sales. It 
was agreed that a core group of craftsmen from the 
Slingsby factory should spend three months at the 
Glasfliigel works to learn the basic techniques. The 
agreement was signed in November 1969, and a few 
weeks later the selected team travelled to Germany. 
They succeeded in learning the necessary skills and 
picked up some especially useful German phrases, too.
Redshaw realised from the beginning that sailplane 
manufacture could be only a part of the operation. 
Research and eventually production of submarines 
with glass-plastic pressure hulls, and other marine 
applications of composite materials, had a high prior­ 
ity (This led to the development of two-person sub­ 
mersible craft for work with oil drilling rigs and in 
deep-sea exploration, as well as other applications and 
devices including marine oil spill cleaning systems.)
The learning process began. How much sailplanes 
had advanced became instantly apparent to anyone 
who compared a Skylark 4, new in 1962, with the 
Kestrel which first flew six years later. The Skylark was 
a simple wooden aircraft with plywood skins, fabric 
covering and a painted finish. Stick and rudder, air­ 
brakes, elevator trimmer and tow release were the 
only controls the pilot had to bother about. The 
modern glass sailplane was a different proposition.
The Kestrel was a complex 1 Tin-span aircraft with 
Wortmann wing sections and an aspect ratio of 25. It 
was known that departures from the correct wing 
profile of one or two tenths of a millimetre (5-6 thou­ 
sandths of an inch) were enough to disturb the bound­ 
ary layer and cause a disproportionate increase in 
profile drag. The wing was built from the outside 
inwards, beginning in effect with the paint. Large 
female moulds for the upper and lower skins had first 
to be constructed to a degree of accuracy far beyond 
anything in the old Slingsby company's experience. 
Making the moulds themselves, from accurate forms 
or 'plugs', was a time-consuming and expensive opera­ 
tion. The moulds, one for the upper wing skin and one 
for the lower, were highly polished and suitably treated 
with parting agents before a white gel coat was applied 
to make the outermost surface of the aircraft. White 
was the preferred external colour, to reduce heat 
absorption from the sun on hot days. With the gel coat 
still soft, layers of alkali-free glass cloth of selected 
weave and orientation, with the minimum required 
amounts of cpoxy resin were laid up by hand with 
rollers or brushes. The resin and glass were in mea­ 
sured proportions of 40 of resin to 60 of glass. Too
much resin did not increase strength and added a lot of 
weight. Too little resulted in dry spots and weaknesses 
in the laminations. The flanges of unidirectional glass 
rovings for the very substantial mainspar and auxiliary 
spars were laid in place, the rovings being wound 
round the metal fittings at the root end to ensure struc­ 
tural continuity. The outer skin in front of and behind 
the spar was then overlaid by a layer of balsa wood 
6mm thick in planks 75mm wide, lightly grooved longi­ 
tudinally to permit them to bend to the aerofoil 
section. (Later, expanded plastic foam or honeycomb 
material was used for all glass sailplanes.)
The filling layer was followed by more glass cloth, 
completing the sandwich. A simple vacuum bag 
system was used to ensure good bonding during the 
subsequent curing process. There were very few cross­ 
wise ribs in the wings. The spar webs and any neces­ 
sary internal brackets, bearings and control pushrods, 
and the boxes for the airbrakes, were built-in after 
curing at this stage. The upper and lower shells were 
then brought together and joined, the resulting wing 
being virtually hollow with a mainspar and a light rear 
spar to carry the flaps and ailerons. Temperature and 
humidity were controlled throughout the laying-up and 
the resin curing time. Post-cure tempering at 50°C 
added a further 20 per cent to the compression 
strength of the material. Some cleaning-up along the 
glue lines, particularly along the leading edge of the 
wing, was necessary, but otherwise the wings emerged 
from the moulds ready for flight. Ailerons and flaps 
were constructed in the same general fashion, and 
were required to fit accurately with the minimum of 
gaps and leakages at hinge lines.
The Kestrel fuselage was also a shell made in female 
moulds. It was of the pod and boom or 'club' shape. 
Steel cross-tubes with spigots to fit into the wings were 
bound into the glass structure. Laminar flow was pre­ 
served as far as possible over the nose, but after transi­ 
tion the cross-section contracted to reduce the area of 
skin exposed to the en