entre section. The 
outer wings were attached by the same type of vertical 
steel pin as used on the T-41, with automatic engage­ 
ment of the fore and aft torsion and drag fittings and an 
ingenious but very simple automatic linkage for the 
aileron drive. The plywood-skinned ailerons were 
mass-balanced in the same way as those of the earlier 
Skylark.
185

--- PAGE 188 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
The fuselage was taken almost without change from 
the Skylark 2. To control such a long and hea\y wing, 
especially in the yawing plane, without lengthening the 
fuselage, larger vertical and horizontal tail areas were 
required, and a mass balance for the elevator was fitted. 
The Skylark 3 was offered on the market with a choice 
of simple wheeled undercarriage or with skid alone and 
a droppable wheeled dolly. Very lew were ever built 
without the wheel, and those that were built in this 
form to begin with were retrospectively modified to 
incorporate a wheel despite the parasitic drag penalty. 
At the time, retracting wheels were hardly ever used in 
gliders, although they had been tried from time to time.
Rigging the Skylark 3 was easy in all respects save 
one. As with the earlier Skylarks and the Eagle, the 
centre section had to be lifted into place with the fuse­ 
lage supported in the upright position. With its very 
heavy mainspar and the airbrake mechanism the 
weight was considerable. The fuselage neck was quite 
high, and getting the wing into the exact position 
required was tricky. Two men with fully operative back 
muscles and functioning vertebral discs could manage 
it, but it was very much better if four were available to 
lift with an extra person to see that the fittings in the 
middle were lining up correctly. Some owners devised 
special equipment to help with this exercise.
In flight, the Skylark 3 came fully up to expectations. 
The best glide ratio was claimed to be 36:1, although 
subsequent flight tests by the EGA yielded a figure of 
32.5. This was nevertheless very good in a factory pro­ 
duction sailplane of the period. (The measured best 
glide of the Ka 6 was 21): 1.) The Skylark 3 was not light 
on any of the controls, and for some pilots it was too 
stable, requiring very firm action to change the pitch 
attitude or to roll into and out of steep turns. Long 
flights in the usual turbulent air of a good soaring day 
could be very tiring for wrists and arms. These faults 
were considered acceptable for the sake of the excel­ 
lent performance
After a few had been built and proved successful, the 
fuselage nose was lengthened by 150mm, moving the 
seat forward to improve the balance for pilots of differ­ 
ent weights. For similar reasons the elevator mass- 
balance was moved forward to a position just behind 
the pilot's seat back, whence its action was transmitted 
to the tail via the control pushrod. In this form the 
Skylark 3B became the standard production model. A 
modification kit was supplied to enable some of the 
earlier examples to be brought to this standard.
Twenty-three 3Bs were built at Kirbymoorside and a 
kit was sent to Canada. Four specials, known as 
Skylarks 3C and D, were constructed with stronger 
wings to meet certain requirements for export to 
Holland and other countries where ainvorthiness regu­ 
lations required it. The Skylark 3E was an experiment 
with the NACA 64 615 profile at the tip and ailerons of 
reduced chord and curved trailing edges. It proved to 
have dangerous tip stalling behaviour, and the tip 
panels were therefore replaced by normal ones after 
test flying.
Subsequently the Skylark 3F appeared. This version, 
following suggestions by Frank living, had a tailplane 
and elevator of greater span and smaller chord, greatly 
reducing the stick forces required, and the trim tab was 
enlarged. The ailerons were fitted with geared seivo- 
tabs to lighten the stick loads. These were tried on 
living's own Skylark 3B before going into production. 
The cockpit canopy of the 3F was greatly enlarged to a 
rather bulbous shape, improving comfort but increas­ 
ing drag to some extent. Of this model another 25 were 
built, including five kits, one of which was sent to New 
Zealand to be assembled by Fred Dunn. The Tull broth­ 
ers at Dunstable built a Skylark 3F from a kit, incorpo­ 
rating modifications of their own, chief among them 
being the fitting of a Skylark 4-type cockpit canopy. As 
usual with amateur constructors, they found that their 
aircraft was slightly out of date before completion.
In the 1956 World Championships, held at St Yan in 
France, the British, Argentinian and Dutch teams flew 
Skylark 3s. Philip Wills and Geoffrey Stephenson 
achieved 6th and 10th places. It must have been a little 
chastening for the British that the Spanish pilots L.V. 
Juez and M. Ara, both flying old Slingsby T-34 Skys, 
placed second and seventh. Paul MacCready of the 
USA won this contest in a French Breguet 901.
However disappointing the results on this occasion, 
the Skylark 3 very soon began to establish a fine repu­ 
tation. The type was used for most of the British gliding 
records broken during 1957 and '58, including speed 
triangles of 100, 200 and 300km by Tony Deane 
Drummond. It was now well understood that the 
future of soaring lay in speed flying around large tri­ 
angular courses, rather than the traditional 'downwind 
dash'. Deane Drummond won the national champion­ 
ships in 1957 with Nick Goodhart only a few points 
behind, both flying Skylarks. The Skylark 3 took six of 
the first ten places.
On 9 June, Alf Warminger achieved a new British 
height record, climbing to 9,000m (30,000ft) in a thun­ 
derstorm. He felt many electric shocks through the 
control column, but luckily his Skylark 3 was not 
directly struck by lightning. In New Zealand Dick 
Georgeson in a Skylark 3B made an out-and-return 
flight mostly above 6,000m (20,000ft), in lee wave over 
South Island for a distance of 330km (205 miles). Later 
he broke the world height gain record, climbing 
10,200m (34,000ft) after release from tow. [The 
absolute height record of 12,630m (42,100ft) was set by 
W B. Ivans in the USA in 1950, but this was not a gain of 
height above release. All previous height records were 
broken in 1961 by Paul Bikle's flight in a Schweizer 1-23 
to 13,880m (46,267ft), with a height gain of 12,690m 
(42,303ft)].
World women's records were broken during a trip to 
South Africa by Anne Burns, who achieved 10,200m 
(34,000ft) height, 434km (270 miles) goal-and-return, 
200km and 300km triangle speed records in a Skylark 
3. During the height climb in a thundercloud she was 
struck by lightning which fortunately did not have 
serious effects, although the aileron and wingtip
186

--- PAGE 189 ---
TYPE 43, SKYLARK 3
plywood were damaged. Denis Burns, Anne's husband, 
broke the goal-and-return record during the same 
expedition, with 572km (336 miles).
On 11 June 1957 Tony Goodhart soared from Lasham 
across the Channel in a Skylark 3. This was the fifth 
cross-Channel soaring flight ever made. Goodhart had 
not planned a Channel crossing, but on arriving near 
Dover at 1,500m (5,000ft) he found himself drifted out 
to sea by a strengthening northerly wind and it became 
easier to use this to reach France than to struggle back 
to land on the English side. He found a useful cloud 
actually over the Channel, using it to climb to 2,550m 
(8,500ft) before continuing with further cloud climbs 
to around 3,000m (10,000ft), to touch down after S^hr 
at St Didier, near Arras. In the following year his 
brother Nick achieved the first flight in Britain to 
exceed 500km (310 miles) distance. Nick Goodhart 
placed second in the World Championships at Leszno, 
Poland, in 1958 against much more costly aircraft.
The peak of the Skylark's achievements came in 
1960, when Rolf Hossinger of Argentina won the 1960 
World Championships at Butzweiler in Germany. He 
performed consistently for the six contest days, 
although he did not win on any one of them. The list of 
outstanding achievements in Skylark 3s could be much 
extended.
The Skylark 3 was proved a thoroughly safe and 
strong sailplane, but there were limits. Under the semi- 
aerobatic Certificate of Airworthiness, manoeuvres 
involving inverted flight and rolls were not permitted. 
This did not prevent someone from attempting them, 
and a Skylark 3F which was seen to be doing rolls in 
May 1961 broke up at Fen Ditton, killing the pilot, an 
RAF flight lieutenant. The tailplane failed first, causing 
the glider to pitch so severely in the negative sense that 
the wing broke under downloads.
At the World Championships in Argentina in 
February 1963, the Dutch pilot Breunissen, flying 
across the start line in the race with his airspeed indi­ 
cator needle evidently jammed hard against its upper 
stop at 200kmh (lOOkt), had to save himself by para­ 
chute when the Skylark 3's starboard wingtip section 
broke off under downloads, the wreckage falling on 
the airfield. The maximum permitted or 'red line' speed 
for this variant, a Skylark 3C which had the stronger 
wings, was 218kmh (118kt). At high airspeeds it was 
normal for the tips of the wings of sailplanes to bend 
down, because the effects of washout, together with 
some torsional distortion, caused the outer parts of the 
wing to reach a negative angle of attack.
The total of all Skylark 3s built, including those from 
kits, was 65. The last to be built at Kirbymoorside was 
the 3G, which had ailerons of reduced chord and 
greater span, heralding the final development of the 
Skylark series, the T-50 Skylark 4, which was to appear 
in 1961.
Outstandingly successful though it was, the Skylark 
3 represented no great technical advance in aero­ 
dynamics, materials or structural design. Slingsby pio­ 
neered the use of glass cloth and resin mouldings in the
Skylark 2 of 1953. In 1957 in Germany the first all glass- 
plastic sailplane, the Phonix designed by Richard 
Eppler and Hermann Nagele, appeared and flew with 
great success. Students in the technical universities in 
Germany at this time, especially at Darmstadt, were 
designing and building sailplanes making full use of the 
new materials, the first results appearing in the air 
before 1965. During the decade following the first flight 
of the Skylark 3, the era of Slingsby's greatest suc­ 
cesses, an opportunity was allowed to slip by at 
Kirbymoorside. No further development was done 
with glass cloth techniques, and no attempt was made 
to use these materials in load-bearing structures and 
skins. Glass cloth/epoxy resin laminates were dis­ 
trusted at this time because of their manifest flexibility, 
and development in this area stopped. This was to have 
serious consequences, not only for the Slingsby 
factory but for British sailplane manufacture generally.
Type 43 Skylark 3B data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a. 
Wing sections
Root
Mid-span
Tip
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
18.2m (59.74ft) 
16.1m2 (173ft2) 
20.5 
7.62m (25ft)
NACA633 620 
NACA633 620 
NACA4415
253kg (5571b) 
358kg (7901b) 
22.2kg/m2 (4.561b/ft2)
A Skylark 3B in flight over Lasham. (Charles E. Brown, RAF 
Museum, Hendon, neg No. 6704-9)
187

--- PAGE 190 ---
Skylark 3B BGA 739, with no wheel, flown to second place 
by Nick Goodhart in the 1957 Nationals. A Miles Gemini and 
two de Havilland Chipmunks are in the background. 
(Charles E. Brown, RAF Museum, Hendon. neg No 6271- 
13)
Deane Drummond equipped for flight at the National 
Championships, with the Skylark 3A. The two-wheeled dolly 
was jettisoned after take-off. (Charles E. Brown, RAF 
Museum Hendon, neg No. 6613-9)

--- PAGE 191 ---
The Tull Brothers' Skylark 3, built from a kit and fitted with the 
Skylark 4 cockpit canopy, greatly improving the appearance 
and reducing drag. (M. Simons)
Rigging the Skylark. The fuselage is supported upright in a 
simple cradle. The wing centre section is resting on trestles, 
ready to be lifted into place. (M. Simons)
Dan 
Smith 
prepares to take 
off 
in 
the 
National 
Championships at Lasham, in a Skylark 3B. The two 
sailplanes in the background are Elliott Olympia 419s. 
(M. Simons)
189

--- PAGE 192 ---
A Skylark 3F, showing the enlarged canopy and improved 
wheel fairing.
The Skylark 3F BGA 980, registered LV-HHO in Argentina, 
with bulbous canopy, aileron servo-tabs and a tailplane of 
reduced chord and greater span. (F. living)
Skylark 3B of the RAF Gliding and Soaring Association, with 
registration number 259 and contest number 132. This air­ 
craft was subsequently sold to the Korean Air Force.
The penalties of flying too fast. The wreckage of the Skylark 
3B from which Arie Breunissen escaped by parachute 
at Junin in Argentina at the 1963 World Championships. 
(F. living)

--- PAGE 193 ---
N5563V
Philip Wills took his Skylark 3F G-ARBJ to the USA and flew 
it in the 1960 US National Championships, selling it before 
returning to Britain. It was registered as N5563V. As shown,
it was one of the few with drop-off dolly wheels. He came 
fourth in the contest. (R. Storck)
Philip Wills (left) and Anthony Deane Drummond (right) 
discuss the Skylark 3 at the Nationals in 1957. Note the 
small cockpit canopy with clear-vision panel open, and the 
careful fairing made possible by the glass-plastic moulding.
The pitot static tube carries an Irving total energy compen­ 
sator, a small venturi designed to prevent false readings on 
the variometer when changing airspeeds. (Charles E. 
Brown, RAF museum Hendon, neg No. 6613-5)

--- PAGE 194 ---
Early production 
canopy
-388—500^— 704—M244-——871
c
s- —
D
— >.j
c
\
^
^
"^^_ _^
It
Aileron hinge 
detail
Root section 
NACA633 618
Later production 
Dart canopy
Tip section 
MACA 4412
C\J
CD
Slingsby 
Type 45 
Swallow
Drawn by Martin Simons 1994

--- PAGE 195 ---
Type 45, Swallow
In the mid-1950s it seemed to many people that there 
was a demand for a small high-performance sailplane 
suitable for amateurs to build at home from kits or 
plans. In the USA the Schweizers had great success 
with their 1-26 design, which had a span of 12.2m (40ft) 
and could be bought complete or in kit form. It was 
small enough to be assembled in an ordinary 
(American) garage and required no expensive tooling 
or equipment. In 1955 a regatta was held at Harris Hill, 
Elmira, New York for this type. The idea was similar to 
'one-design' yacht racing and it proved very popular, 
leading before long to an annual 1-26 competition 
which still remains on the calendar. The modest per­ 
formance of the aircraft matters little in contests when 
everyone flies the same type. The total number of l-26s 
produced in kit or complete form reached 689 before 
production ceased in 1981.
The present author was among those who suggested 
to Slingsby that something similar might do well on the 
British and European market. I did some preliminary 
design work for a small wooden sailplane of 12m span 
using the NACA 6 series wing profiles, and sent a 
general-arrangement drawing and some figures to 
Kirbymoorside. Unknown to me, John Reussner, who 
had joined Slingsby's company as draughtsman and 
designer, already had a very similar aircraft on the 
drawing board. This became the T-45. The prototype 
flew in October 1957, but unfortunately it was badly 
broken when Reussner himself flew it into some tele­ 
phone wires at Sutton Bank. Slingsby, seeing it 
suspended above the ground, remarked that it had 
perched like a swallow and the T-45 had its name. (The 
T-44 was a study for a high-altitude research sailplane 
with a pressure cabin, designed to a US Air Force 
specification. It was never built.)
The small span of the Swallow prototype brought 
the wing loading to a figure considered too high, and 
Slingsby was prevailed upon to increase the span of the 
next example. This was done by extending the lines of 
the wing by 60cm on each side, with a consequent 
improvement in aspect ratio and soaring ability but a 
tendency to depart from the original idea of a very
small aircraft for building in confined spaces. In terms 
of structure weight and size the 13.2m (43.3ft) Swallow 
was almost back to the original Skylark 1, and possibly 
this was in Slingsby's mind at the time.
The second prototype T-45 was sent to Lasham for 
evaluation and certification by the BGA test group 
there. There was some doubt there as to whether the 
Swallow was to be regarded as a cross-country 
sailplane for experienced pilots, or whether it should 
be for early solo training. There was a pressing need in 
the clubs for an up-to-date trainer. The old Slingsby 
Tutors and Prefects still widely used were well out of 
date, and the new 'laminar' wing profiles coming into 
general use had different characteristics in flight from 
the old Gottingen sections. The test group thought 
that, whatever the manufacturer's original purpose, 
the Swallow would undoubtedly be used by clubs for 
training, and hence it had to have very safe handling. In 
particular, it should not spin too readily even if flown 
clumsily.
The Swallow, with its strongly tapered wing and only 
3° of washout, did spin sharply from a stall in turning 
flight, and was judged by the test group to be unsafe for 
beginners. Reluctantly Slingsby increased the washout 
to 7°, thus tending to spoil the high-speed glide. The 
test group were still not entirely satisfied with the spin­ 
ning behaviour. Slingsby therefore introduced a stop in 
the elevator control circuit which prevented the pilot 
from pulling the stick back too far. As a result it 
became very difficult to persuade the Swallow to spin 
at all. It was found subsequently that the stick restric­ 
tion tended to reduce the height obtainable on winch 
launches, the pilot being unable to climb steeply, but in 
a training aircraft this, too, was not considered a 
serious defect. A steep climbing attitude taken up too 
early on the launch could be disastrous if the winch 
cable should break. At this stage Slingsby suggested he 
could reduce the washout to what it had been before, 
relying on the stick restriction to prevent problems, 
but the test group indicated that the T-45 should be left 
just as it was. Certification went ahead on this basis. 
Slingsby was not entirely convinced, but the Swallow
193

--- PAGE 196 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
entered production, with kits offered as an option.
Structurally, the design followed previous success­ 
ful types. The wing had a spruce mainspar with 
stressed skins of gaboon plywood like the Skylark, but 
the wing was of orthodox two-piece construction. For 
simplicity the usual intermediate ribs in the leading 
edge were omitted. The ailerons were fabric covered. 
Powerful airbrakes, by now considered essential on all 
sailplanes, were fitted. The rigging system was very 
simple, being based on that of the old Weihe, which 
had always been outstandingly good in this respect. A 
wing was presented to the fuselage and connected to it 
at the front sub-spar and the mainspar by two steel pins 
aligned on the same centre. The wingtip could then be 
rested on the ground and the other wing attached in 
similar fashion. Then both wingtips were raised and a 
single pin joined the upper flanges of the main spars.
The fuselage was very similar to that of the T-42 
Eagle, being a wooden space frame of rectangular 
cross-section with plywood skins top and bottom, but 
the sides mostly covered with fabric and without the 
refinement of a rounded turtle-decking behind the 
wing. The cockpit sides were double skinned in 
plywood. The nose cap and the curved decking ahead 
of the windscreen were glass-polyester resin mould­ 
ings. There was a wheel for landing and a simple ash 
skid sprung with rubber rings. The tail unit was 
entirely orthodox, with a trim tab for the elevator.
Following his usual marketing practices, Slingsby 
sent the Swallow round the clubs for evaluation, and 
very favourable reports were received and published 
during 1958. The Swallow did become very popular in 
Britain, and there were worthwhile export orders. In 
the clubs Swallows were widely used for first-solo 
flights and for soaring up to Silver C standard. At least 
one, in South Africa, achieved a Gold C distance flight 
of 300km. Later versions were built with improved 
cockpit canopies and other changes of minor detail.
In 1967 the tobacco firm W. D. & H. O. Wills (no rela­ 
tion to Philip Wills) announced a competition to find 
the best-trained early solo glider pilots, one in the 
north of Britain and the other in the south. The prizes 
were two new Slingsby Swallows to be awarded to the 
gliding club responsible for training the pupil. Fifty- 
five clubs entered 235 pilots. The contest involved 
extensive written tests and practical ground and flying 
tests. The winners were M. Barker and N. Ellis, of the 
of the Derby and Lanes and Cornish Gliding Clubs 
respectively.
Production and sales continued steadily until 1968, a 
total of 106 being built with more under construction 
when the main assembly shop at the factory, including 
the jigs for the T-45, was destroyed by fire. A Mark 3 
Swallow was projected but not proceeded with. Many 
of the type remain in regular service.
Despite the original hopes, not many were assem­ 
bled from kits. Among the few was the Swallow known 
as Penguin, which was built in 15 months by a syn­ 
dicate of four young Cambridge University Gliding 
Club members during 1958-59. With advice from
Slingsby himself, the group reduced the wing washout 
to the figure that had originally been intended, 3°, and 
omitted the elevator stop. Penguin thus came closer to 
Reussner's notion of a small sailplane for experienced 
pilots, and it gave excellent service. It was used for 
various enjoyable expeditions to hill-soaring sites, 
smaller competitions and rallies, visiting the Long 
Mynd and Malvern Hills, Clwyd and Snowdonia in 
North Wales, Sutton Bank in Yorkshire and Portmoak 
in Scotland, where one of the owners achieved a height 
climb of 3,450m (11,500ft). Later it was used for a 300- 
km goal Diamond flight from the Long Mynd to Leiston.
Penguin's greatest achievement was Stuart Waller's 
flight in the Dunstable Regional competitions in July- 
August 1983. Twenty-five sailplanes competed, among 
them several of the best 'open'-class types flown by 
famous pilots. Waller, who had helped build the air­ 
craft, achieved an ambition by reaching Snowdon in 
North Wales, where he was able to soar up the face of 
the mountain in the anabatic thermal from the rock 
face to reach 1,350m (4,500ft). On his way to Wales he 
had seen many of his competitors in fields below, and 
he flew on across the Menai Straits to land in Anglesey, 
Penguin becoming the first sailplane ever to do so. It 
was a 'Gold C' distance of 305km. Waller won the day, 
but unfortunately an accident to the trailer prevented 
Penguin from getting back to Dunstable in time to 
compete next morning, so after scoring 1,000 points 
one day there was zero for the next. At the end of the 
week the modified Swallow nevertheless placed 
seventh.
The prototype T-45, which had crashed into the 
wires, was taken away by John Reussner and rebuilt 
with a wingspan of 15m and a lengthened fuselage. In 
this form, known as the Swift, it matched the Standard 
Class specifications and proved quite successful until 
written off in an accident in 1963, when its pilot suf­ 
fered a heart attack in flight.
The second prototype Swallow posed for a photograph. 
Slingsby (far left) adjusts his camera. (Slingsby collection)
194

--- PAGE 197 ---
TYPE 45, SWALLOW
Type 45 Swallow data 
Prototype
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a. 
Wing sections
Root
Tip
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
Production model
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a.
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
12m (39.37ft) 
12.88m2 (139ft2) 
11.18 
7.315m (23.67ft)
NACA633 618
NACA 4412 (modified)
190.5kg (4201b) 
317.5kg (7001b) 
24.6kg/m2 (5.01b/ft2)
13.2m (43.3ft)
13.55m2 (145.9ft2)
12.6
7.06m (23.2ft)
195.4kg (4311b) 
317.5kg (7001b) 
23.4kg/m2 (4.81b/ft2)
Bel Ami, a typical Swallow built for a gliding club, in flight. 
The photograph was used to illustrate the Slingsby brochure 
on the T-45. The skid was more often left open without the 
canvas fairing. (Slingsby collection)

--- PAGE 198 ---
Although here carrying a competition number, the Swallow 
was not often flown in serious contests. (Slingsby collection)
Building from a kit. Anthony Edwards, Stuart Waller and 
John Griffiths bring the fuselage of their Swallow out of the 
workshop in Cambridge. (A. Edwards)
The Penguin at a late stage in construction, assembled in 
the garden of Anthony Edwards's home. (A. Edwards)
196

--- PAGE 199 ---
Rigging the Swallow. With both wings attached to the fuse­ 
lage by two steel pins, the tips are raised together to allow 
the upper main spar connection to be made. (A. Edwards)
Anthony Edwards, who in 1959 was one of the four who built
Swallows on safari in the Lake District in 1989. Small, light 
Penguin, now owns another Swallow. He is shown here 
and easily transported, the T-45 still finds favour with small 
flying it in May 1989 over Grisedale Pike in the Lake District, 
groups in search of adventure. (A. Edwards) 
(A. Edwards)
197

--- PAGE 200 ---
NACA 633620
Aileron gap 
seal detail
Slingsby
Type 49
Tip 
MAC A 6412
Capstan
Drawn by Martin Simons 1993\2

--- PAGE 201 ---
Type 49, Capstan
The T-43 Skylark 3 and the T-45 Swallow were in full 
production and sales were going well. Slingsby's atten­ 
tion turned again to two-seater training sailplanes. In 
civilian clubs the T-2 IB was still widely used, and the 
ATC had a fleet of T-31s, but these aircraft were aging. 
The T-42 Eagle was expensive, large and heavy, good 
for cross-country flying and for aero-towed launching 
instruction, but not for primary training.
The market was becoming highly competitive. In 
Germany the Rhonschwalbe from Schleicher and the 
Specht of Egon Scheibe were successful basic trainers, 
a few of which found their way into British clubs, but 
these were not much superior to the T-31 and not what 
seemed to be needed now. There were several excel­ 
lent two-seat sailplanes from European factories, 
notably the Ka 7, which was produced in quantity after 
1959 by Alexander Schleicher. A few were appearing in 
Britain, usually being imported by private syndicates 
for cross-country flying. The Ka 7 had wooden wings 
and tail, but the fuselage was a built-up frame of 
welded steel tubing, fabric covered. The all-metal 
Blanik from Czechoslovakia, by the standards of the 
time highly complex with large Fowler flaps and a 
semi-retractable wheel, was also available at a rela­ 
tively low price from the state-owned and subsidised 
LET factory. It did not seem to Slingsby that these 
types were suitable for ab initio training, and British 
gliding clubs were quite unfamiliar with metal struc­ 
tures, whether aluminium alloy or steel tubing.
Some thought had been given to an improved 
version of the T-21, and the outcome in 1957 was the T- 
21C, later renumbered to become the T-46. This had 
practically the same wing as the T-2 IB, but a new fuse­ 
lage and tail unit. The tall wing pylon was done away 
with and the wings, still with strut bracing, were 
mounted directly on the fuselage, the wingspan thus 
being increased to 17.22m (56ft). There was an 
enclosed cockpit and the tail unit was enlarged and 
simplified. The performance and handling were a little 
better than the T-21, but the cost of production was 
quite high. Only one was built. (It remains in service 
still.)
If the Swallow was to become the standard first-solo 
sailplane, a two-seater which had similar performance 
and handling was required. It might best be imagined 
as a two-seat Swallow using similar NACA wing pro­ 
files. It had to be of simple wooden construction for 
easy maintenance and repair in the clubs, had to have a 
fully enclosed cockpit and, while being suitable for 
primary instruction, should also perform well enough 
for teaching students cross-country flying and naviga­ 
tion.
In Britain, instructors accustomed to the T-21 still 
tended to prefer side-by-side seating. The instructor 
could watch the students' facial expressions and see 
where they looked and how the controls were held, 
and conversations could be natural and instructions 
given in a normal voice. The disadvantage of the side- 
by-side layout was the increased fuselage drag, but this 
was not a serious problem in a training aircraft. The 
penalty could be reduced by reclining the seats slightly, 
allowing the fuselage depth to be less. For solo flying, 
simple and easily accessible fitments should be built in 
to allow ballast to be carried, ensuring a safe e.g. posi­ 
tion. Slingsby probably also thought that, while every­ 
one else in the northern hemisphere was building 
tandem two-seaters, he might find a good market for 
something different.
By the end of 1960 work on the design of the T-49 
was proceeding and Slingsby was ready to accept 
advanced orders. (The T-47 was a projected 20m-span 
Skylark which was never built, and the T-48 a delta- 
winged research aircraft design study which was trans­ 
ferred to Handley Page Ltd to emerge as the HP 115.)
The T-49 wing plan was similar to that of the 
Swallow, with well-marked taper. The section changed 
from the thick root profile NACA 63;3 620 to the NACA 
6412 at the tip. The increase of camber to 6 per cent, as 
indicated by the first digit of the tip profile's number, 
was intended to delay stalling there by increasing the 
available lift coefficient. Some geometric washout was 
built in so that the outer wing would not reach the 
stalling angle before the root. Large Schempp-Hirth 
airbrakes were fitted.
199

--- PAGE 202 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
The structural methods followed the already well 
established practices at Slingsby. The wing had spruce 
spars and gaboon plywood stressed skins, the open- 
framed portions aft of the mainspar being fabric 
covered. The ailerons were plywood skinned and mass 
balanced. As in the Swallow the fuselage was a built-up 
space frame of wood with cross-frames in highly 
stressed areas, fabric covered except on the underside, 
where there was a plywood skin. Three-dimensionally- 
curved shells around the cockpit, not stressed, were 
moulded in glass reinforced plastics which were also 
used for fairings and wingtips. The very broad trans­ 
parent cockpit canopy, hinged at the back to lift 
upwards, was made in three sections rather than being 
moulded in one piece, so that if one section cracked or 
was otherwise damaged it was not necessary to 
replace the whole unit. By careful attention to balance 
and moments the pilots could be placed entirely in 
front of the wing, instead of being underneath it as in 
the T-21. The field of view from the cockpit was 
extremely good. The wing was attached to the fuselage 
by three horizontal steel pins with a fairing to close the 
gap at the root. The undercarriage was a simple wheel 
and skid arrangement with a small tailwheel.
The tail unit was a departure from normal as far as 
Slingsby was concerned. The plywood skinned 
tailplane was mounted behind the fin on a fuselage 
extension, with the rudder above it. The entire vertical 
tail was raked back, probably more for reasons of style 
than to gain any important aerodynamic advantage, 
although the effect of the sweep was to increase the 
moment arm of the surface slightly. The elevator was 
fitted with a large tab. With the reduced fuselage height 
and the swept fin the sailplane had a pleasing appear­ 
ance in side view.
While the T-49 was still on the drawing board Walter 
Kahn, a well-known and influential sailplane pilot and 
member of the EGA council, met a representative from 
the firm of W D. & H. O. Wills, whose most widely 
advertised trade mark was a capstan. The possibility of 
the cigarette manufacturers supporting gliding as they 
supported other sports was discussed, and the 
outcome was that W D. & H. O. Wills agreed to provide 
a two-seater for the EGA, to be used for training and 
checking gliding instructors. The EGA had established 
an instructors 1 panel whose responsibilities included 
visiting gliding clubs regularly to ensure that training 
standards were being well maintained. The possibility 
of the EGA employing a full-time coach was being con­ 
sidered, and if a suitable two-seat sailplane could be 
pro\ided the prospects seemed very good. Slingsby 
was persuaded without much difficulty to name his 
new two-seater Capstan. The first flights were made in 
November 1961, and the Capstan was sent to Lasham 
for the usual testing and certification procedure by the 
BGA Test Group.
Now the kind of problems which had haunted 
Slingsby most of his life reappeared. The stalling and 
spinning characteristics of the prototype T-49 were 
unsatisfactory. On stalling it would behave quite nor­
mally on most occasions, the nose pitching down 
moderately and the sailplane picking up speed again in 
the ensuing recovery. On other occasions, unpredict- 
ably, one wing or the other would drop very sharply 
and the T-49 would enter an incipient spin and lose 
height rapidly. Such behaviour in a basic trainer was 
unacceptable. The fault could not always be demon­ 
strated, and Slingsby's own test pilot had not discov­ 
ered it. The Capstan behaved perfectly most of the 
time, but every now and then it would 'bite' severely. 
This inconsistency made the aircraft more dangerous 
than if it had always reacted in the same way. It may be 
that the wing was unusually sensitive to slight amounts 
of yaw or sideslip at the stall, so that it would only mis­ 
behave if flown a little clumsily. Such clumsiness was 
only too likely to occur with a student pilot.
Slingsby's first response was one of disbelief, since 
the problem had not shown up before. A second 
opinion was sought, and it took further trials before 
the peculiarity manifested itself and everyone was con­ 
vinced. To try to establish the cause of these difficul­ 
ties, tests were made with wool tufts on the wings. A 
helicopter took station alongside the glider as it was 
flown at various speeds, and an observer attempted to 
see what the airflow was doing. For various reasons 
the results were not very helpful. The Capstan was 
returned to Kirbymoorside and the wings were mod­ 
ified to increase the washout. This tended to degrade 
the performance but had to be accepted.
Further tests ensued and more difficulties emerged. 
With the e.g. approaching the designed rearward limit 
corresponding to two fairly light pilots in the cockpit, 
the T-49 had two distinct spinning modes. One was 
normal, with easy recovery. The other was a very 
dangerous flat spin with a very slow reco