lls collection)
G-GAAA
42

--- PAGE 45 ---
HJORDIS
Dragging Hjordis to the launch point during the internation­ 
als of 1937. Philip and his brother Bill Wills lead the way, with 
Gerry Smith helping. Kitty Wills is at the wing-tip. 
( Wills collection)
The wheeled dolly was used only for ground handling. It was 
removed before take-off. ( Wills collection)
43

--- PAGE 46 ---
CO
C\J
Strut detail 
Scale x 2
420 4^3904-440
Type 23 
main frames
Tapes to stiffen 
ribs
Typical modification 
for spoilers
Type 23
Centre section
profile 
Gottingen 535
Outer wing 
sections
Drawn by Martin Simons 1991
Slingsby
Type6
Kirby Kite

--- PAGE 47 ---
Types 6 and 23, 
Kirby Kite
Slingsby's Type 6 was under construction even before 
the first Type 5, the Grunau Baby 2, was completed. It 
seemed to Slingsby that expanding British gliding 
clubs and private-owner groups would soon be 
needing something better than the Baby, but he 
guessed it would be unwise to produce a really 
advanced sailplane at this stage. He probably looked at 
the Hjordis and recognised that it was not going to be a 
sailplane for the average pilot and would never be pro- 
duced in quantity. He also recognised his own limita- 
tions. For stressing and advanced aerodynamic 
calculations he relied on expert consultants. He felt 
capable of reworking and developing an existing well- 
proven design, as he had done when converting the 
Falcon 1 into the two seater Falcon 3, but he was not 
ready to begin something totally new from scratch.
There were several obvious ways of improving the 
Grunau Baby, and with a little cunning it would be pos- 
sible to use many of the wooden and metal compo- 
nents in the new type, saving on jigging and workshop 
time. While the wing's main aerodynamic features, 
including the profiles and the basic planform, could be 
retained, it could be extended in span to 14.2m (46ft 
Gin). This would involve only the addition of an extra 
rib bay on each side, stretching the outer wing panel 
and so improving the performance at small cost. Gull 
wings were very fashionable, and improved stability in 
circling flight compared with wings which had no dihe- 
dral at all. They also looked very graceful and had sales 
appeal. While they cost a little more to build, the spars 
of a strutted sailplane were not very elaborate, so the 
extra complication was not likely to cause serious 
problems. Finally, the fuselage could be given a 
streamlined form instead of the hexagonal box section 
of the Grunau type. The Kirby Kite took shape in 
Slingsby's mind. The prefix, Kirby, came from the 
village where the factory was now established, 
Kirbymoorside.
There was some urgency. The BGA was to hold a 
major competition at Sutton Bank at the end of August 
1935. The Hjordis would be there and so would several 
Grunau Babies from Slingsby's and other factories. If
the Kite also could be ready, and made a good impres- 
sion, orders would come in. Having made the decision, 
there followed a period of frantic work over a 14-week 
period. Supervising the workmen building primary 
gliders, Falcons and Grunau Babies in the factory took 
most of Slingsby's days, and many details of the 
Hjordis also had to be elucidated on the shop floor. 
Design work on the Type 6 was done mostly in the 
evenings after normal working hours, Slingsby 
employing a teenager, Thoby Fisher, to help. A general- 
arrangement layout diagram was completed and 
construction began, using full-sized lofted templates, 
long before the detailed drawings were completed. 
The design was not finalised until some time after the 
prototype had done what was required of it at Sutton 
Bank.
Wherever possible, Grunau Baby parts were used in 
the wing and tail. It was comparatively easy to transfer 
ideas and components from the older design to the 
new. The rudder was taken straight from a Grunau 
Baby. The tailplane and elevator were treated in much 
the same fashion, but the tips were rounded slightly. 
The wing, like that of the Baby, had a single mainspar, 
with a plywood skinned D nose to resist torsion. Aft of 
the spar the ribs were braced laterally with linen tapes. 
The ailerons incorporated the nearly elliptical taper of 
the Baby with change of section and washout, but the 
additional rib bay near the tips gave the curved outline 
a slightly more pointed shape. There were very few 
refinements. The gaps along the hinge line of elevator 
and ailerons, 30mm wide, were sealed only by strips of 
doped fabric. The rudder hinge was not shrouded even 
in this elementary way.
The fuselage was round-backed in cross-section 
with a pointed keel. The outline of each frame was 
made up of a semicircle above the datum line. Below, 
two circular arcs intersected at the keel. The low wing 
mounting pylon required only small extensions of the 
three main frames. The whole fuselage was skinned in 
plywood, forming a monocoque shell over a light 
framework of longerons and cross-frames. The cockpit 
was open, but an elementary wooden 'dog collar' type
45

--- PAGE 48 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
of canopy was fitted, leaving the pilot's head exposed 
to the aiiilow without any windscreen. A pad was pro- 
vided at the junction of the wings as a headrest. As in 
the Grunau Baby, the seating position was upright.
Everything worked out remarkably well. The Kite 
underwent its first successful test flights a few days 
before the EGA competition started, and was entered 
in Class 1, the 'high performance' category, along with 
several Grunau Babies (one built by Slingsby), Scud 2s, 
the Hjordis and the German Rhonbussard. 'Sling', as he 
was now known, made the first brief flights, but 
handed over to John C. Neilan for the contest proper. 
Neilan's first competition flight was a triumph for him 
and for Slingsby. He was launched over the Sutton 
Bank slope by winch to 120m (400ft) and quickly found 
a thermal which took him above the hill lift to 990m 
(3,300ft). He headed off immediately downwind, east- 
wards towards the coast. More thermals and glides 
took him close to Bridlington with plenty of height, so 
he turned south and, with another thermal to help, 
eventually landed at Garton. The distance was 87km 
(54 miles), and it proved to be the longest cross- 
country flight of the entire competition.
The next day was not so successful. Neilan, without 
goggles or flying helmet, was sucked into a cloud and 
soaked with rain. The total lack of windscreen proved 
a serious matter. On emerging, still finding it hard to 
see where he was going, he had to land hastily in a 
small field. To avoid hitting the upwind hedge he 
ground-looped the sailplane, tearing the skid off and 
damaging a wingtip on an inconvenient tree. It did not 
take Slingsby long to put things back in place, and 
Neilan was in the air again next day. The total flying 
time recorded by the Kite during the competitions was 
under ten hours. Neilan carried off the Wakefield 
Trophy for his flight to the coast.
Slingsby's judgement of the market was correct, and 
a fairly steady stream of orders came in. The prototype 
was sold in November, without alteration, to Frank 
Charles, a champion speedway rider well known at 
Wembley Stadium. He had never flown before, but to 
the astonishment of his friends in the Barrow-in- 
Furness Gliding Club and the rest of the gliding move- 
ment in Britain he taught himself to fly within two 
months. Immediately after taking delivery he made 
two ground slides and two low hops in the Kite. In 
January 1936, without any further practice, he had 
himself bungee launched off the top of the hill above 
Ireleth, gliding down safely to land 240m (800ft) below 
on the beach. He retrieved the Kite, which he called 
Cutty Sark, using a trailer he had built himself, and 
repeated the exercise. On his next flight a few days 
later, equipped with a variometer, he found himself in a 
thermal and circled up in it for a flight of nearly half an 
hour. By the end of January he was making soaring 
flights of up to an hour's duration, and by February was 
essaying his first cross-country flights. Whatever else 
might be said about Charles's exceptional talent, he 
had certainly demonstrated that the Kirby Kite was not 
difficult to flv.
The second Kite was built for Dudley Hiscox, a 
member of the London Gliding Club. The nose was 
lengthened to create more room for tall pilots. Taking a 
lead from the later models of the Grunau Baby now 
appearing in Germany, a better cockpit canopy was 
designed, incorporating a small and very necessary 
windscreen. Slingsby did not immediately learn all the 
lessons of Neilan's field landing incident. The Type 6 
lacked spoilers. If owners required these, as most 
eventually did, a retrospective modification was neces- 
sary.
Later models of the Kite had larger rudders of a 
graceful curved outline. This not only improved the 
appearance, but gave the controls a more balanced 
feel. A feature of the Kite which could have been 
improved was the wing/fuselage junction. By bringing 
the wing down in the centre to just above the pilot's 
shoulders and mounting it on a narrow pylon, an 
awkward constriction between the top of the fuselage 
and the wing root was created for the airflow. There is 
little doubt that the performance was reduced slightly 
by this, but the point was not considered seriously at 
the time. A rival to the Kite, produced by the small 
Dunstable firm Dart Aircraft Ltd, was the Cambridge 
sailplane. This, too used essentially the same, slightly 
stretched, wing as the Grunau Baby, but without any 
gull bend. The streamlined fuselage of the Cambridge 
retained the tall pylon which kept the wing roots out of 
the disturbed air aft of the cockpit. Only a couple were 
built. Philip Wills indicated that the control response 
and harmony of the Cambridge was better than that of 
the Kite, which he classed as only fair. At the time it 
was almost impossible to arrive at accurate per- 
formance figures without extensive flight tests, but it is 
probable that the Cambridge would have gained a 
point or two over the Kite if the comparison had been 
made.
Early in 1936 a minor controversy arose about the 
structural weight of the production Kirby Kites. 
Slingsby claimed 112kg (2481b) empty. In an article 
Philip Wills quoted 122kg (2701b). Llewellyn Barker 
stated forcefully that he had weighed a Kite and found 
it scaled 142kg (3131b). Slingsby responded by taking a 
new Kite to an official weighbridge which presented 
him with a certificate reading 114kg (2521b), which 
included instruments. Barker was unconvinced and 
prepared to bet £5 on his own figures. Whether 
Slingsby ever took him up on the wager is not 
recorded. In much more recent times a carefully 
restored Kirby Kite was found to weight 127kg (2801b), 
while another, no less well preserved, scales 163kg 
(3601b). There is little doubt that quite large variations 
arise between wooden sailplanes from the same 
factory, so all the claimed weights and wing loadings, 
and the associated performance figures, must be 
regarded with some suspicion. In flight, providing the 
e.g. with the pilot on board was correct, the total 
weight probably made very little difference.
Two 
Kites competed in the 
1936 
National 
Competitions at Camphill. The weather was dis-

--- PAGE 49 ---
TYPES 6 AND 23, KIRBY KITE
appointing, and although Hiscox won a prize for the 
greatest total hours by any individual, there were no 
especially notable flights by the Kites. By the end of the 
year, nevertheless, nine had been completed. In 1937 
the total reached seventeen, by which time most of the 
leading British gliding clubs and several private-owner 
groups possessed one. Among the individual private 
owners was Amy Johnson. Almost all were finished in 
clear dope and varnish all over, but one belonging to a 
syndicate at Dunstable was painted grey, and another 
at the Midland Gliding Club, on the Long Mynd in 
Shropshire1 , had the plywood surfaces yellow with 
clear-doped fabric.
Kirby Kites were used by many pilots for the Silver C 
badge flights. Six competed at the Nationals in 1937 
although they were no longer classed as high-perfor- 
mance sailplanes. Even so, two of the best flights were 
made by Kites, 125km (77 miles) by J. E. Simpson to 
the coast at Withernsea, Yorkshire, and 128km (79 
miles) by K. Lingford to Easington. Production contin- 
ued until 1939, by which time 25 had been completed.
An interesting variation, about which nothing more 
is known, was the Kite built with the NACA 4416 wing 
profile, tapering at the tip to NACA 2412. Apparently 
flown in 1937 or early 1938, it might have been a trial of 
NACA sections before applying them to the Type 12 
Gull, which flew in April 1938.
One early production Kite was shipped to South 
Africa, where Philip Wills, during a business visit to 
that country, demonstrated it and where it remained 
after he left. Others were exported to Canada and 
Rhodesia, another went to South Africa, and one or 
two found their way to the USA. One, registered 
NC28800, was built from plans, with a very neat fully 
enclosed cockpit, by Herman Kursawe in the USA and 
flown there successfully.
In 1940 most gliders and sailplanes in Britain were 
impressed into service with the RAF. To find out if 
wooden aircraft could be detected by radar, sailplanes 
of several types were flown over the English Channel 
from Christchurch, Hampshire, in 1940. They were 
towed out to sea by Avro 504 tugs, released at 3,000m 
(10,000ft) and flown back towards the land while the 
radar operators at Worth Matravers near Swanage 
attempted to detect them. It was established that they 
did show up on the screens. They all had steel 
pushrods and cables operating the controls. After 
these early tests, a Kirby Kite was stripped of its cover- 
ing and all of its control drives were replaced with 
wooden pushrods wherever possible. Further tests 
showed that it could be detected, though not easily. By 
this time, the danger of a glider-borne invasion of 
England had receded, and attention was turning in the 
other direction. A large programme was launched to 
work out operational methods and to train military 
glider pilots. A small fleet of sailplanes, mostly Kirby 
Kites, 
was assembled at Ringway aerodrome, 
Manchester.
One of the first exercises from this base, described 
by Lawrence Wright, who was there1 as an observer,
was a simulated attack on a railway viaduct near 
Macclesfield in Cheshire. A Kite and a Rhonbussard 
played the role of military troop-carrying gliders. 
Painted in the standard camouflage of dark green and 
dark earth, they floated to the objective silently and 
landed safely, after which imaginary airborne troops 
stormed out of them and destroyed the objective. The 
local Home Guard never noticed.
After some doubt about a suitable airfield for further 
work, the Number 1 Glider Training Squadron (GTS) 
moved to Haddenham in Buckinghamshire, where five 
Kirby Kites, duly camouflaged, arrived on 1 Jan 1941. 
Others came later; a total of 14 being on the squadron's 
books. Experiments and demonstrations for high- 
ranking officers were organised with Tiger Moth tugs. 
A Hurricane fighter was used to discover if gliders 
were easy to shoot down. They proved to be sitting 
targets while on tow, but in free flight they were hard to 
catch in the gunsights. If he was unable to see the 
fighter approaching, the glider pilot could hear it and 
take evasive action. Time trials were made to see how 
rapidly a large fleet of troop carriers could be 
launched. The Kites were supposed to be towed off in 
rapid sequence, released, and then to land quickly so 
that they could be launched again without delay, simu- 
lating a continuous stream of larger craft. A similar 
trick is used in the theatre sometimes, when a few 
'extras' are made to simulate an army, marching on at 
stage left and off stage right, running round behind the 
scenery to re-emerge stage left. This went wrong at 
Haddenham when some of the undisciplined pilots, 
former gliding club members, found thermals and 
refused to come down.
Inevitably, in the slightly longer run, not many of the 
1 GTS Kites survived. Those that did were mostly allo- 
cated to the ATC, though they were little used since 
soaring was not permitted in wartime.
As the war drew to a close, Slingsby looked again at 
the Type 6, and decided that a modernised version 
would be worth developing. It was allocated the type 
number 23. The wing was unchanged except that spoil- 
ers were fitted as standard. The fuselage was rede- 
signed with a landing wheel and a taller pylon to 
eliminate the aerodynamic trap under the wing root. 
The pilot's headrest now was lower than the leading 
edge. The new sailplane flew in December 1945, but did 
not enter production. The gain in performance over the 
old Type 6 was insufficient to justify the additional 
cost, and Slingsby was sure something better could be 
achieved. The eventual outcome was the Type 26 Kite 
2. The Type 23 was sold to the Cambridge Gliding Club 
in 1946, but soon thereafter was resold to the USA. Its 
final fate is unknown.
Some six or seven Kirby Kites still survive. The 
prototype, owned once by Frank Charles, is still 
extant, though at the time of writing it is in a very sad 
condition at Dunstable and awaiting restoration. It was 
flying regularly until the late 1960s. The remainder are 
highly prized by their owners, maintained in excellent 
condition and flown whenever possible. All have been
47

--- PAGE 50 ---
fitted with spoilers, and some have enclosed transpar- 
ent canopies improvised by their owners at some time. 
One, painted again in wartime camouflage, is displayed 
at the Museum of Army Flying at Middle Wallop in 
Hampshire. Another has been restored by Michael and 
Tony Maufe to its original clear varnish and dope 
condition.
Kirby Kite data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
WTing sections:
Root
Tip 
Length o.a.
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
The prototype Kite with the angular Grunau Baby type of 
rudder. ( Wills collection)
14.2m (46ft Gin) 
14.49m- (156ft2) 
13.8
Gottingen 535 
Symmetrical 
6.21m (20.37ft)
137.8kg (3041b) 
230.8kg (5091b) 
15.9kg/m2 (3.261b/ft2)
In production the Kite was provided with a windscreen, but a 
persistent draught blew down the pilot's neck. The clear-var­ 
nished finish was typical for all sailplanes of the period. 
(Slingsby collection)
Frank Charles, with children, in the cockpit of the prototype 
Kite 1. His experience of speedway racing caused him to 
wear a crash helmet. Note the absence of windscreen. 
(Slingsby collection)
48

--- PAGE 51 ---
BGA registration number 291, known as Gracias (pro- 
service until 1964. The Air Ministry registration letters G-
nunciation left to the imagination) was a Kirby Kite based at 
ALNI, were required for a short period during 1949-50.
the Midland Gliding Club in pre-war times, which remained in 
(J. Grantham)
BGA 310 has been restored by A. and M. Maufe to the clear- 
Slingsby's factory when new. Note the spoilers, a retrospec- 
varnish and clear-doped finish it would have had on leaving 
tive modification. (A. Maufe and E. A. Hull)

--- PAGE 52 ---
BGA 394 in its present colour scheme, on winch launch at 
Dunstable in recent times. (M. Simons)
The Kirby Kite as painted for use during the Second World 
War. (P. Warren)
A Kirby Kite recently restored to its wartime camouflaged 
colour scheme, as it appeared at the time of the radar trials 
during the Second World War. (P. Warren)
50

--- PAGE 53 ---
TYPES 6 AND 23, KIRBY KITE
One of nine Kirby Kites flying in the 1938 BGA National 
Competitions at Dunstable, The pilots of this Midland Gliding 
Club example were F. J. Davies, R. F. James and B. T. 
Oliver. Note the absence of any seal for the elevator hinges. 
(C. Brown)
Another photograph of the Midland Gliding Club Kirby Kite, 
possibly BGA 251, at Dunstable in 1938. The contest 
number 20 was on paper, pasted on the wings and rudder for 
the duration of the competition only. If the identification is 
correct, this aircraft still survives in modified form, with a 
landing wheel. (C. Brown)
A rare photograph of the only Slingsby Type 23 Kite 1A in 
flight over Sutton Bank. The large sailplane below is the T-14 
Gull 2, another prototype which did not go into production. 
(Slingsby collection)
51

--- PAGE 54 ---
0)
Wing section 
Gottingen 426
\Q Drawn by Martin Simons 1991
Early 
production
Later, mam 
production
Enlarged 
rudder
Early 
production
Slingsby
Type?
Kirby Kadet
(Cadet)

--- PAGE 55 ---
Type 7, Kirby Kadet
The Kirby Kadet, which subsequently suffered a 
change of name to become the Cadet TX Mk. 1, made 
its first test flights on 11 January 1936. With various 
modifications it remained in quantity production for 
ten years, and a few were still being produced in the 
early 1950s. The Slingsby factory built 254, which does 
not include some kits sold to amateur construction 
groups and sets of spare parts which may have been 
made up into complete aircraft some time later. Sets of 
plans were also distributed, which might have resulted 
in some additional unrecorded amateur building. 
Other manufacturers produced the type under licence, 
the chief of these being Fox & Davies Ltd in East 
London, Papworth Industries, Enham Industries, 
Martin Hearn Ltd and Ottley Motors in Wood Green, 
Middlesex. The recorded total of all Type 7 Kadets and 
Cadets when production finally ceased at Ottley 
Motors in 1954 was 431. A few were exported either 
complete or in kit form to Canada, Eire, Palestine and 
South Africa. One at least was built as the UT-1 in the 
USA, and one was built from a kit in Australia in 1939. 
Probably the true total is more than the published 
records suggest.
The designer was John Stanley Sproule, who began 
working for Slingsby during 1935. Sproule had been a 
member of the group of Yorkshire lads who had toured 
Yorkshire with Slingsby in 1930-31, looking for soaring 
sites. When he left school he joined Vickers in 
Weybridge, Surrey, as an apprentice. He gained experi- 
ence helping to build the Manuel Wren sailplanes at 
Dunstable, and had done more flying there. Now, as a 
qualified draughtsman and also a capable metal fitter, 
he came to Kirbymoorside with ideas.
At this time British pilots who had survived their first 
efforts in primary gliders and wanted to progress to 
soaring flight were put into one of two types of 'sec- 
ondary' aircraft. The Prufling, designed in 1926 by 
Alexander Lippisch in Germany, handled fairly well but 
had a higher wing loading than the primary gliders 
without being much more efficient. Accurate control 
of airspeed and well co-ordinated turns were required 
if it was to be kept aloft above a soaring slope. Few
beginners were able to use it for their 5 min soaring 
flight for the C badge. Sproule felt that it was quite 
unsuitable for its purpose, and suspected that German 
clubs had discarded it long before. The other well- 
known secondary sailplane was the Hols der Teufel 
(Devil take it). This, too, originated with Lippisch, and 
an enlarged version was in production at the 
Schleicher factory near the Wasserkuppe. A set of 
plans for an almost identical sailplane were contained 
in a pocket in the back of a small book on building 
gliders, produced by Hans Jacobs, Lippisch's assistant. 
It looked in most respects like an enlarged nacelled 
primary glider. It had a lighter wing loading than the 
Prufling, with a plywood and fabric covered fairing 
around the pilot. The wings were of large area, braced 
with struts rather than wires. The tail unit was 
mounted on an open 'gate'-type fuselage. Schleicher's 
prototype had appeared in 1927, and the Jacobs book 
in 1928.
In 1935 a few examples of the Hols were flying in 
England; one built in 1932-3 by Harold Holdsworth of 
the Bradford Gliding Club from the Jacobs drawings, 
others imported as kits or complete from Schleicher. 
This type, too, Sproule found unsatisfactory for begin- 
ners. The controls were sluggish and, although it had 
the reputation of soaring well in light breezes, it did not 
give inexperienced pilots much confidence in turbu- 
lent 
air. 
Accordingly, 
soon 
after 
arriving 
at 
Kirbymoorside, Sproule persuaded Slingsby to let him 
design a more satisfactory training sailplane. It had to 
be robust, easy to fly and capable of soaring, but cheap 
to build and repair. Slingsby evidently did not need 
much convincing, for Sproule was given an almost free 
hand and set to work. Drawing and construction of the 
prototype went ahead at great speed during the 
autumn and winter of 1935.
The wing was based on that of other training gliders, 
with a rectangular planform and parallel twin spars 
diagonally braced internally against torsion. Sproule 
did not have available any ordinates for suitable wing 
sections, so he designed his own profile. It was quite 
satisfactory. The leading edge was covered with
53

--- PAGE 56 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
plywood, but this was not intended to carry any 
stresses, being merely a fairing to form a good entry to 
the airflow. Fabric covered the rest of the wing. The 
ailerons were of the simplest type, with a little reflex- 
ing of the section towards the tips. The gap along the 
hinge line was sealed with strips of doped fabric above 
and below, but was sometimes left open in senice. 
Twin lift struts with diagonal wire bracing, attached to 
the wings quite near their mid points, obviated the 
need for expensive and heavy wing root fittings. The 
first Kadet had slight dihedral, but this was removed 
before the type entered production. The wings at the 
centre butted closely, root rib to root rib, and were con- 
nected to the fuselage with two long steel rods, one for 
each wing being pushed in from the front when the 
holes in the steel fittings were aligned. To lock these 
rods in place a strap was clipped over the handles 
where they rested on either side of the pilot's headrest.
The main fuselage cross-frames extended upwards 
to cany the wing, forming a pylon which was skinned 
with plywood. The tubular steel struts attached to the 
lower corners of these frames. Behind the pylon the 
rear fuselage was a box of square cross-section, 
skinned on all four faces with plywood. This was not 
obvious on external inspection, because on top of the 
box a light fairing was built with a straight upper longe- 
ron supported by triangular cross-frames, running 
from the trailing edge of the wing down to the leading 
edge of the tailplane. This relatively flimsy structure 
was covered with fabric, hiding the top skin of the 
inner box from view. The front of the fuselage was 
modelled after the Priifling and Hols der Teufel. The 
nose, rounded in plan view, was raked back. The very 
elementary cockpit was immediately ahead of the 
main fuselage frame, which supported the pilot's back 
and headrest. There was no windscreen. It was still 
considered important to leave the pilot's face fully 
exposed so that the airspeed could be sensed and any 
slipping or skidding more easily detected. An ele- 
mentary seat, control column and rudder pedals were 
provided but there was no trimmer, no airbrake lever, 
and at this stage, no instrumentation of any kind.
A rubber-sprung landing skid laminated in ash and 
shod with a thin steel plate, extended from the extreme 
nose to the rear main frame. At the extreme front an 
open bungee launching hook was fitted, but at first it 
lacked a releasable coupling for winch launching.
The tailplane, of triangular plan, was also based on 
existing types of glider, and was mounted on the fuse- 
lage box with two vertical bolts and castellated nuts. 
Two small steel struts underneath provided additional 
stiffening. The elevator was hinged to the tailplane 
spar with a gap between, sometimes closed by strips of 
fabric, as with the ailerons. The rudder, mounted on a 
plywood covered fin, was quite tall on the prototype 
and aerodynamically balanced. The hinge gap was not 
sealed. A spring-steel tailskid completed the under- 
carriage.
Early flights revealed some teething troubles, 
though there is some disagreement about their sever-
ity. The outer wings of the prototype Kadet were not 
sufficiently stiff in torsion, aileron reversal was experi- 
enced. This was not very unusual in the lightly-built 
sailplanes of this time. Some, notably the German 
Professor type, would readily continue to circle one 
way at moderate airspeeds with the stick fully over for 
turning in the opposite direction. The forces on the 
control surfaces were great enough to cause the wing 
itself to twist. With left aileron applied, the leading 
edge on the port side twisted up and the starboard side 
twisted leading-edge down, and the sailplane would 
bank to the right. To recover from this situation the air- 
speed had to be reduced, which usually restored 
normal control response. On the first Kirby Kadet, 
aileron reversal was cured by doubling the internal 
diagonal cross-members in the wing outboard of the 
struts.
Another minor problem was apparently caused by 
separation of airflow over the fuselage, which resulted 
in buffeting of the tailplane. At certain airspeeds this 
could set up a harmonic vibration with the whole fuse- 
lage structure which was sufficient to alarm the pilot. 
Some were convinced that something had broken, or 
feared that something was about to do so.
The wing section was changed on the second proto- 
type to the Gottingen 420. In April 1936 the first two 
Kadets were being tried out by members of the 
Midland Gliding Club at the Long Mynd, one of whom 
reported: These machines exactly suit our require- 
ments. They are responsive to control without being 
tricky; they have no vices and immediately imbue con- 
fidence in the downy class of "B" candidates. Kadet I 
(the original of the species) has a lower-lift wing 
section than Kadet II, and is consequently faster and 
more pleasant to handle. The unrestricted outlook and 
nippyness of Kadet I is refreshing after the cloistered 
complacency of the Falcons - in spite of the better per- 
formance of the latter.' Tail buffeting was not noticed. 
Despite these comments about handling, presumably 
the slower stalling speed of the Go 426 version was in 
the end thought more important for 'downy' pilots than 
the slightly better controllability of the prototype. The 
Go 426 profile became standard in production.
According to Harold Holdsworth, who was ground 
engineer for the Yorkshire Gliding Club at this time, the 
prototype Kadet was bought by the club at Sutton Bank 
and was frequently damaged by inexperienced pilots. 
It met its demise in a spectacular accident. A visitor, 
misjudging the altitude badly, turned downwind from 
the soaring slope and struck the top wire of the fence 
which ran along the summit at that time. The wire 
scraped along the steel-shod skid and then cut the rear 
fuselage horizontally in half. After the dust settled, 
only the port wing remained more or less intact. The 
Kadet was never rebuilt. The pilot escaped with 
bruises. If the wire had been a little higher it would 
have sliced into the cockpit.
A cure for the tail buffeting was suggested by 
changes that had been made to the fuselage of Edmund 
Schneider's well known Grunau Baby design. On the

--- PAGE 57 ---
TYPE 7, KIRBY KADET (CADET)
Kadet, the straight spine of the fairing behind the wing 
was redesigned with a curved sweep down, and the 
fuselage nose was improved to give a slightly smoother 
entry. After this there were no more complaints, and 
the basic outline of the Kadet was settled. How many 
Kadets or kits were sold before the fuselage modifica- 
tions were introduced is not recorded, but it seems 
that the type entered production in the straight-backed 
form. In April 1937 a drawing showing this was pub- 
lished in the EGA magazine Sailplane and Glider. 
However, some of those sold before the outbreak of 
the Second World War had the modified fuselage.
The height of the rudder was also altered, but 
exactly when this was standardised in production is 
not clear. The American example (which survives) was 
of the straight-backed type, and it had a tall rudder. The 
Australian Kadet of 1939 had the curved fuselage spine 
and revised nose, but this example (which also still 
exists) had a tall rudder. Yet some photographs show 
that straight-backed Kadets sometimes had small 
rudders with only one rib bay above the height of the 
small fin. The 1937 drawing also shows this. Slingsby 
and Sproule probably experimented with various ideas 
before the final configuration was established. In any 
case, Kadet sales to British gliding clubs reached about 
20, not counting kits, before production ended at the 
outbreak of war. No one could have anticipated that a 
few years later, The Slingsby Type 7 would enter mass 
production.
The Air Ministry became convinced that a gliding 
programme for the ATC would be worthwhile. The first 
ATC gliding school was opened at Kirbymoorside, 
early in 1942 using gliders built by Slingsby, and further 
courses for instructors were arranged there. Slingsby 
supplied a set of small-scale plans for the Kadet to the 
ATC upon request, and Jim Ford, an officer of the 85 
Squadron ATC at Southgate in Middlesex, undertook 
the task of redrawing these and working out the neces- 
sary system of jigs to enable the aircraft to be con- 
structed by cadets under supervision. The squadron 
itself began work on a Kadet while this was being done, 
using one of the outbuildings of the old house, 
Ashridge, which served as the headquarters of the 
squadron opposite what is now Oakwood station on 
the Piccadilly Line of the London underground railway. 
Copies of Ford's plans were distributed to other 
squadrons. Within ten months the Kadet was com- 
pleted, and it was assembled and shown off in Trent 
Park early in 1943. This was the first glider to be built 
by ATC cadets. Newspaper photographs published at 
the time show that it was of the older design with 
straight back, tall rudder and no wheel. Others were 
built by other squadrons though how many is not 
known.
The Kadet design was now reviewed by Royal 
Aircraft 
Establishment 
(RAE) 
engineers 
at 
Farnborough and modified. Sproule, who by this time 
was serving in the Royal Navy, was not impressed. In 
his opinion most of the alterations were unnecessary, 
adding weight without really doing much to make the
aircraft more practical. For instance, the light rudder 
cables he had specified were replaced by cables which, 
he remarked, would be almost strong enough to 
operate the rudder of the Queen Mary. The most sub- 
stantial changes were to the fuselage. Instead of the 
enclosed square-sect ion plywood tube aft of the wing, 
on