n on 17 
April 1937, at first with no problems. Philip Wills wrote 
in glowing terms of the King Kite, which he still called 
Hjordis 2, in Sailplane and Glider. He had done some 
brief soaring flights in it and anticipated no trouble.
Came the day of the spin test, about a month after 
the first flight. Wills was aero-towed to 1370m (4,500ft) 
and did a one-turn spin to the left from which he recov- 
ered easily. The next, a fully developed spin to the 
right, almost killed him. The King Kite would not 
recover, even with the flaps in different positions. 
Height was disappearing very quickly. Wills jettisoned 
the cockpit canopy, undid his straps and jumped. He 
was thrown violently back into the cockpit. Again he 
heaved himself out against the centrifugal force and 
was forced back. In desperation he flung himself even 
more violently out and was dumped back again. 
Fortunately his latest strenuous action had somehow 
brought the King Kite out of the spin. It emerged half 
inverted, without the canopy, the pilot without his 
spectacles but with just enough height and presence of 
mind to recover, make a shaky circuit and land.
Explanations were not immediately forthcoming. 
The competition was six weeks away. Hastily, a new, 
taller rudder was made and fitted. Further tests estab- 
lished that it was possible now to recover from a spin, 
though it was still very easy to get into one. The proto- 
type was taken to York aerodrome for aero-towed 
launches and to be flown by the team members during 
the last few days of May. An even larger rudder was 
fitted. All three King Kites, with giant rudders, were 
delivered and shipped to Germany late in June. The 
team was made up to five aircraft by including the 
Hjordis, which Wills decided to fly in preference to the 
King Kite, and the Falcon III two-seater, to be flown by 
Murray and Fox.
The first take-off by a British sailplane on the first 
day of the first International Championships was also 
Willy Watt's first bungee launch. As soon as the rope 
fell away he attempted a turn. The King Kite instantly 
spun and hit the ground 50m (165ft) down the slope. 
The worst fears of the British team were confirmed. 
Fortunately Watt emerged from the wreckage unhurt, 
having, he declared, landed on his toes.
Watt continued to compete, taking over one of the 
other King Kites, and achieved three distance flights 
without further accident. On one day he flew in cloud 
for a total of 90min. His extensive powered flying expe- 
rience undoubtedly helped him in this. John Neilan 
damaged the other King Kite in an unsuccessful 
bungee launch, and it was repaired overnight by the 
German workshops. A few days later, immediately 
over the Wasserkuppe, he too discovered the King 
Kite's propensity to spin. To the relief of his friends he
recovered safely, though very low down, and contin- 
ued undaunted on a cross-country flight. When her 
turn came, Joan Price also made a good flight of 92km 
(57 miles) without incident. Of the British pilots, Willy 
Watt did the best in the final tally, totalling 460km (286 
miles) in the ten days and placing twelfth out of 22 indi- 
vidual entries, two places above Wills in the Hjordis. 
The team returned thoughtfully to England. The 
National Competitions were held in Derbyshire, start- 
ing in late August. The King Kites had been expected to 
enter, but they did not turn up. Wills, in Hjordis, won.
In 1938 Slingsby, who had the two remaining King 
Kites on his hands, invited Watt to fly one in the 
National Competitions at Dunstable. It now had a new 
type of cockpit canopy, faired to a smoother contour 
than the original. On the second contest day Watt flew 
140km (87 miles) to Wymondham, near Norwich. Later 
in the week another flight found him working his way 
carefully round the west side of London via 
Brooklands and Woking to a landing in Kent for a pro- 
jected distance of 122km (75 miles). Three others, 
Christopher Nicholson, Philip Wills and Joan Price, 
landed in Kent on this day but had flown east of 
London. Watt came second to Nicholson in the final 
results. The King Kites apparently did very little further 
flying, if any, before the outbreak of the Second World 
War. In the 1939 competitions Watt flew a Slingsby 
Type 13, Petrel.
What was wrong with the King Kite?
According to an article, probably written in 
Slingsby's own publicity office, 'the rush to complete 
the machine resulted in wing jigging errors which were 
repeated in all these prototypes' and the error was not 
discovered for some considerable time. In 1965 
Slingsby himself wrote 'Many years later I was making 
an incidence check on a King Kite wing and discovered 
to my surprise that instead of the three degrees "wash- 
out" we had specified, the wings had two degrees 
"wash in" hence the tendency to drop a wing and spin 
at low speeds'. How such an error could occur has 
never been explained. The original blueprints, which 
survive, show 3.5° washout correctly.
It was once suggested by Philip Wills in conversation 
that the wings had been built-upside down. This could 
not have been literally true. Possibly the unusual shape 
of the NACA 23021 wing profile caused some confu- 
sion. It undoubtedly puzzled ordinary glider pilots. 
Sailplane published a photograph with the caption: 
The wing root of Hjordis II, showing the bi-convex 
wing section. By looking along it from one end, the 
reader will see that it is not symmetrical.' To some it 
might have seemed that, in the desperate hurry to get 
the aircraft ready, wing ribs of the nearly symmetrical 
section might have been put in the wrong way up, 
perhaps as far out along the wing as the 'gull' bend in 
the main spar. This could have caused the wing to 
exhibit some very peculiar stalling behaviour. That the 
profile was not actually symmetrical was visible in the 
photograph, but because of the character of the NACA 
five-digit camber it is not very easy to tell from a casual
69

--- PAGE 72 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
glance whether the root rib was the right way up. 
Comparison of the photograph with a computer plot of 
the 23021 section, however, indicates quite clearly that 
it was not inverted. Moreover, the section changed 
towards the tips progressively to an orthodox four- 
digit cambered section which could not be, and was 
not, mistaken. Another photograph of the wing assem- 
bly shows clearly that the ribs were correct over the 
outer panels at least. It is almost impossible to believe 
that ribs could have been put into the wing upside 
down. It is not much easier to accept that the main 
wing jig was set up with the carefully designed change 
of angles the wrong way round.
The mystery remains. Slingsby admitted that a 
fundamental mistake was made in his workshops, but 
never said exactly how it happened. A highly promis- 
ing prototype sailplane was doomed before it left the 
factory, and two more were built with the same fault.
During the Second World War the remaining King 
Kites were impressed and occasionally flown by ATC 
Officers at various stations. In 1946 one broke up in the 
air, killing the pilot, The accident was attributed to glue 
failure, probably as a result of storage in damp condi- 
tions. The last King Kite, the one with the new-style 
canopy flown by Watt in 19:58, was seen de-rigged in a 
hangar at Bramcote Naval Air Station during the first 
post-war British National Competitions in 1947. It 
became the property of the RAF Gliding and Soaring 
Association, but was scrapped at Detling in 1950.
The story does not quite end there. The blueprints 
were rescued from their damp storage place in the loft
The King Kite being moved to the launch point at the Wasser- 
kuppe in 1937. Behind is the Falcon 3. ( Wills collection)
at the factory in 1978. David Jones, an enthusiastic 
builder and restorer of sailplanes, was determined to 
bring the King Kite back to life. With advice from Prof 
Wortmann in Stuttgart, modern low-drag wing profiles 
were chosen. Thoby Fisher, who as a teenager had 
worked for Slingsby and who had done some of the 
design work on the original Kirby Kite of 1935, helped 
with restressing to modern requirements. A moulded 
cockpit canopy was fitted, but otherwise, only minimal 
changes were made. The new King Kite, not looking 
much out of place at a modern gliding site, flew magnif- 
icently and safely in 1983, 46 years late.
King Kite data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Wing sections:
Root
Tip 
Length o.a.
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
15.5m (51ft) 
13.6m2 (166.8ft2) 
18
N AC A 23021 
NACA4312 
6.297m (20ft Sin)
195kg (4291b) 
282kg (6201b) 
20.7kg/m2 (4.241b/ft2)
Performance
Best glide ratio (estimate) 1:25
7O

--- PAGE 73 ---
TYPE 9, KING KITE
* * «
* > 
**
Neilan chats with his crew on the Wasserkuppe landing 
ground. ( Wills collection)
Neilan in the cockpit of the King Kite. Note the old form of the 
Slingsby logo; a golden eagle on a blue background with a 
wreath. (Willscollection)
71

--- PAGE 74 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
The prototype King Kite before the test flights. (Wills 
collection)
The first modification to the rudder. (Wills collection)
Moving a King Kite to the launch point at the Wasserkuppe. 
( Wills collection)
72

--- PAGE 75 ---
TYPE 9, KING KITE
King Kite in flight. (Wills collection)
David Jones's new King Kite in 1983, with entirely new wing 
profiles but otherwise as close as possible to the original. 
Behind are a Slingsby T-31 and other vintage sailplanes of 
various types. (E. A.Hull)
Wills (right) and Watt (left) rigging the King Kite with its new 
canopy at Dunstable in 1938. ( Wills collection)

--- PAGE 76 ---
V
Strut details 
(Scale x 1.5)
Wing root section 
MAC A 4416
CO
CM
--CJ
to
0)
Early cockpit 
canopy
..-J£s
Later struts, 
steel tubes with 
plywood fairing
Early struts, 
solid spruce
Tip section 
RAF 34 (Mod)
Drawn by Martin Simons 1§91
580
Slingsby
Type 12
Gull

--- PAGE 77 ---
Type 12 and 15, 
Kirby Gull
The Slingsby Type 10 Kirby Kitten and Type 11 Kirby 
Twin were small powered aeroplanes which Fred 
Slingsby designed with the help of John Sproule and 
Mungo Buxton. A good deal of work was done on the 
airframes, but neither was completed. Sproule then 
left to work for Airspeeds, and Slingsby, alone again in 
his drawing office, laid out a new sailplane, his Type 12, 
which he named Kirby Gull.
Without the kind of government support that gliding 
received in several European countries, it was vital that 
any new product from the Yorkshire factory should be 
inexpensive. It also had to cater for the needs of the 
ordinary club glider pilot, whose experience was very 
limited and who could not be expected to handle any 
very large, fast and heavy aircraft. The market was not 
ready for anything comparable to the 19m and 20m 
sailplanes which dominated the international record 
breaking and competition scene, yet something better 
than the old Kirby Kite was needed now. The ability to 
stay up in the lightest of slope lift and climb in weak 
thermals remained important, but the need to fly fast 
through sink, to 'penetrate' without losing height too 
rapidly, was becoming equally significant.
The Kirby Gull was a little over 15.33m (50ft) in span, 
with a strut-braced gull wing mounted high on the fuse- 
lage. The aspect ratio was 15.8. The most radical depar- 
ture from Slingsby's previous practice was the 
adoption of an American wing section, the NACA 4416, 
which was tapered over the outboard panels to a 
version of the RAF. 34 at the tip. Slingsby cautiously 
tried out the NACA profile by having a special Kirby 
Kite built with this section. (It was flying at Sutton 
Bank early in March 1938, and stayed there all 
summer.) Having established that the section behaved 
as the wind tunnel tests from the USA indicated, he felt 
confident that it would be suitable for the Gull. With 4 
per cent camber it would be faster than the old 
Gottingen 535 but not as extreme as the NACA five- 
digit profiles used for the King Kite.
Not yet understanding why the King Kite had 
behaved so badly (the errors in construction had not 
been detected), Slingsby reverted to an older policy for
preventing tip stalling. The RAF. 34 section had a 
slightly reflexed camber, 2 per cent at its maximum, 
compared with the 4 per cent of the 4416. In Germany it 
would have been normal to give such a wing six or 
eight degrees of negative twist. The amount of 
washout incorporated in the original Kirby Gull is 
uncertain, since drawings exist which conflict slightly 
but it was quite small, probably 2°. Slingsby was trying 
to prevent the serious loss of efficiency at high speeds 
associated with large washout angles, the outer wing 
bending down as the angle of attack there became neg- 
ative. It is possible that Slingsby changed this feature 
after experience with the first two or three Gulls, 
increasing the washout geometrically from the original 
2° to 3.5° which became the advertised figure.
Structurally, the wing was entirely orthodox, with a 
laminated spruce mainspar curved gently to produce 
the gull shape and a stressed-skin plywood leading 
edge, stiffened with extra riblets to withstand torsion. 
The spar was a box section over the inner part of the 
wing, but changed to a C, with only one plywood web 
further out. A diagonal member transferred the tor- 
sional loads to the rear wing root fitting. Since the 
single streamlined strut reduced the bending loads to 
zero at the wing root, the fittings were of the simplest 
and lightest kind. The leading edge, mainspar and rear 
diagonal spar were each joined to the fuselage frames 
with a single horizontal steel pin. The port and star- 
board wings were not directly attached to one another, 
the gap between them being closed by a rather elabo- 
rate built-up plywood fairing after the controls had 
been connected. A light spar attached to the rear of the 
outer wing ribs carried the ailerons. There was no sec- 
ondary spar inboard. Tapes were used to stiffen the ribs 
laterally. The control surface hinges on the Gull were 
much neater than those of the Kite. The aileron spar 
was faired and stiffened with a D-section leading edge 
of plywood, and the hinge line was shrouded, though 
not totally sealed against air leakage through the wing.
The fuselage was also orthodox, being a semi-mono- 
coque shell supported by light longerons and cross- 
frames with stouter mainframes to take wing, strut and
75

--- PAGE 78 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
landing loads.The cross-section was round backed 
with a pointed keel. The cockpit was comfortable with 
a well shaped seat and space for a back-type para- 
chute. A small instrument panel, the rear of which was 
accessible for making and inspecting connections, was 
large enough for four instruments.
Ha\ing seen the latest German techniques during his 
visit to the international competitions in 1937, Slingsby 
developed a contoured cockpit canopy. At this time, 
small sheets of transparent plastic could be moulded 
individually by hand into three-dimensional curves, but 
the pulling or blowing of entire canopies was not yet 
practicable. To build the canopy a wooden frame had to 
be laminated on a form. Into this, 11 separate trape- 
zoidal segments of plastic were fitted. Aerodynamically 
the shape was excellent, with only small ridges at the 
edges of the panels to disturb the airflow, but the view 
from inside the cockpit was not good, being obstructed 
in every direction by the rather wide wooden hoops. 
Because of reflections on the front panel, which was at 
a very oblique angle to the pilot's line of sight, and the 
distortions caused by the moulding process, the view 
directly ahead was very poor. There was only a small 
round porthole at each side to allow clearer vision. The 
view directly ahead became most important when 
approaching to land, a lower standard of visibility at 
this time was accepted by expert pilots for the sake of 
improved performance. The main danger for them was 
that of collision with another sailplane when circling 
together in a thermal. When turning it was most neces- 
sary to look out to the sides and above, and the Gull 
canopy was not bad in this respect.
There was no wheel, landings being made on a 
rubber-sprung skid. A coupling for aero-tow and winch 
launching was fitted just above the front skid mount- 
ing, and there was an open bungee hook on the skid 
plate itself. It was not usual at this time to mount a 
winch launch release under the belly of a sailplane. 
The tail unit followed usual practice, being con- 
structed from wood and covered with fabric. It was not 
strut-braced. The most serious and surprising omis- 
sion from the original Kirby Gull was any form of 
landing approach control. There were no spoilers, 
flaps, or airbrakes.
The prototype made its first flight in March 1938. 
Satisfied with its behaviour by the end of the month, 
Slingsby was allowing prospective customers to fly it 
at Sutton Bank. One of the first to try it was Frank 
Charles, who had bought the prototype Kite, but he did 
not place an order for a Gull. (Probably at this time he 
discussed \\ith Slingsby the type of sailplane he would 
really like; the result was the Type 13 Petrel.) Slingsby 
took the Gull to an Easter aero-towing meeting at 
Ratcliffe aerodrome, Leicester. This, the first meeting 
of its kind in Britain, was arranged jointly by the 
London and the Derby & Lancashire gliding clubs. P. M. 
Watt demonstrated the Gull, releasing from tow at 
1,800m (6,000ft) and putting it through an acrobatic 
routine including spins and recoveries on the way 
down. It was bought on the spot by Dudley Hiscox,
who completed a cross-country flight of 93km (58 
miles) on the following day.
The Gull was greeted with enthusiasm, and in the 
preliminary lists for the forthcoming national competi- 
tions four were entered. Three were completed in time, 
one going to the Derby & Lanes Club, one to the 
Yorkshire Club, and one to the Midland Club. In the 
event only one, from Derby & Lanes, appeared in the 
competition in July. It did well, though it made only 
two cross-country flights.
It was soon clear to all the new owners that some 
improvements were necessary. After the first three or 
four production Gulls, by the end of July 1938 spoilers 
were introduced. At the same time the cockpit canopy 
was redesigned. The wooden hoops holding the trans- 
parent panels were reduced in width to make them less 
obtrusive, and the front of the canopy was extended 
forward as far as possible and the foremost central 
segment was hinged at the leading edge so that the 
pilot could lower it and obtain a direct, if rather 
restricted, view ahead. An alternative type of strut was 
introduced, a circular-section steel tube faired with a 
built-up plywood case. In this form production contin- 
ued. Five more were completed before the end of the 
year. In the USA, Herman Kursawe built a Gull from 
plans in 1942. This brought the total to ten.
On 30 May 1939 the Yorkshire Club's Gull was 
involved in a double fatal accident. On aero-tow at 
Welburn, it got out of position soon after take-off and 
rose too high. Probably the poor view ahead was partly 
responsible, causing the glider pilot to lose sight of the 
tug. The tow aeroplane was pulled tail-up into the 
ground and the Gull's starboard wing broke. Both 
pilots were killed.
The Gull also acquired a reputation for spinning 
easily, though it was as quick to recover as it was to 
enter the spin. One pilot at the Derby & Lanes Club suf- 
fered a broken winch cable in mid-launch, stalled and 
spun, but recovered to land safely, all within the space 
of about 120m (400ft).
Providing the pilot was aware of the characteristics 
of the Gull it proved easy to fly, responsive to the con- 
trols and there was no doubt that its performance at 
high speeds was a considerable advance on that of the 
Kite.
It had been an ambition among British glider pilots 
for some years to soar across the Channel. There had 
been crossings during 1931 by Lissant Beardmore, who 
was aero-towed from Lympne, and by Robert Kronfeld, 
who was twice launched to 3,000m (10,000ft) to glide 
across in each direction. Neither had attempted any 
soaring on these occasions. A prize offered in 1938 for 
the first person to soar across had not been claimed. 
Philip Wills and Christopher Nicholson on separate 
occasions had come into sight of the opposite shore 
and contemplated it, but had insufficient height to 
glide over when they reached the coast.
The opportunity came on 22 April 1939. Geoffrey 
Stephenson in the Blue Gull was winch launched quite 
late in the afternoon at Dunstable, in a strong north-
76

--- PAGE 79 ---
TYPE 12, KIRBYGULL
westerly wind. Not at first thinking of the Channel, he 
made rapid progress, crossed the Thames, reached the 
Medway at 900m (3,000ft) and arrived at Hawkinge, 
near Folkestone, below 300m( 1,000ft), expecting to 
land. A strong thermal over the aerodrome changed his 
mind. He climbed swiftly to cloud base and continued 
into the cumulus, gaining height at 360m/min 
(l,200ft/min) to 1,800m (6,000ft), and from there set 
course. Emerging from the cloud, Stephenson was 
already offshore, and he flew on through sinking air to 
arrive over the French coast a little east of Cap Gris- 
Nez. He found no more thermals and landed at Le Wast, 
16km (10 miles) inland, at 5.35 p.m., less than 3hr after 
take-off. The distance was 204km (126 miles). The 
flight was rightly greeted in the the press as an epic 
achievement. It was 11 years before the feat was 
repeated by two pilots on the same day in April 1950. 
The exercise of getting the glider and its pilot back 
home was almost equally meritorious, since author- 
ities on both sides required documents which did not 
exist. Anne Edmonds (later Welch), having a valid 
passport, deserted her engagement party to join the 
retrieving crew.
In the National Competitions of July 1939 at 
Camphill, three Kirby Gulls competed. The Blue Gull, 
now sporting English and French flags painted on the 
fuselage just below the leading edge of the wing, was 
flown alternately by Stephenson and Donald Greig. 
They were placed third in the final score sheet, beaten 
only by Christopher Nicholson and Philip Wills, both 
flying German aircraft.
To those who had bought Gulls in the early days, 
Slingsby offered a retrospective modification scheme, 
but in the case of his first buyer, Dudley Hiscox, he 
offered to exchange the aircraft for a new one. Late in 
1938 Hiscox accepted the replacement. Adjacent 
photographs published subsequently in Sailplane and 
Glider showed the two aircraft. The new arrival was 
now named Gull 1, because the Gull 2 (a two-seater) 
was on the drawing board at Kirbymoorside. It also 
bore Slingsby's new transfers instead of the old golden 
eagle emblem.
The prototype Kirby Gull was bought by the Sydney 
Soaring Club, whose representative visited Dunstable 
late in 1938. It was returned to the factory and brought 
up to the new standard, with spoilers and an improved 
canopy, and freshly painted light blue but with clear 
doped fabric. The old golden eagle insignia was 
replaced by the more modern Slingsby transfers. It is 
probably not a coincidence that the Sydney Gull was 
re-finished in the same colour as the cross-Channel 
Gull. There was plenty of blue paint available.
Gliding in Australia at this time was underdeveloped, 
with scattered clubs surviving almost in isolation from 
one another. There was no doubt that the potential for 
cross-country flights was great, but little had been 
achieved. The Sydney Soaring Club would now be 
called a private-owner syndicate rather than a club, as 
it had only four member's. Its base was at Camden, 
south of the city. The Gull arrived there in April 1939
complete with trailer. It was the most advanced 
sailplane so far seen in Australia. The Gull attended the 
first national gliding meeting ever held in Australia, at 
Belmont in Victoria, during the last nine days of 1939. 
From flat ground with launches by winch it made 
several good local soaring flights in the hands of Martin 
Warner and Norman Hyde, and a great many more brief 
circuits. In 1940 soaring was forbidden in Britain, but 
no such restriction applied in Australia. Back at 
Camden, again from a winch launch, the Gull, flown by 
Stephen Newbigin, broke the Australian Height record 
on 27 January with a 2,370m (7,900ft) climb.
Cross-country flying from Camden was greatly 
restricted, because mountains and bush country 
enclose Sydney on three sides, with the Pacific Ocean 
on the fourth. At Easter 1940 the Sydney group decided 
to explore the vast interior. An area of relatively flat 
wheat and sheep farming country, exceeding Western 
Europe in area, was available beyond the Great 
Dividing Range. The sailplane was taken to Narromine, 
beyond the Blue Mountains, 460km (285 miles) by road 
from Sydney. A de Havilland Moth tow aeroplane 
owned by Dr G. A. M. Heydon, a central figure in the 
club, flew there to await the ground party's arrival. 
There followed what was probably the world's first 
soaring tour. Each day the sailplane was launched and 
flew across-country as far as possible in any direction 
the pilot found suitable. He would land in a large 
paddock (field) or at an aerodrome. From there he tele- 
phoned the others to announce his position. The Moth 
and the trailer followed. On the next day another pilot 
would be launched to land as far away as he could, and 
the others would follow. In the four days of the Easter 
weekend a total of 550km (340 miles) cross-country 
soaring was done, and the height record was raised to 
over 3,300m (11,000ft). With the outbreak of war in the 
Pacific, soaring was suspended.
In 1945 the Sydney Gull required re-covering with 
new fabric. After this the group set off for a second 
sailplane safari, starting at the Royal Australian Air 
Force (RAAF) base at Parkes. Heydon's tow aeroplane 
was now a Tiger Moth. After a day's practice flying, on 
24 December Martin Warner flew 317km(197 miles) to 
Jerilderie and reached 3,510m (11,700ft) on the way. 
The flight would have qualified for the international 
Gold C badge, but the barograph carried did not read 
above 3,000m (10,000ft) so the claim was disallowed. 
The next day, the Tiger Moth having arrived early in the 
morning, Harry Ryan was launched in a hot northerly 
wind, and to the astonishment of the air traffic con- 
trollers landed shortly after 2 p.m. at Essendon, which 
at that time was Melbourne's main airport. Ryan had 
seen an airliner take-off shortly before he made his 
own approach into a wind that almost equalled his 
flying speed. The distance was 271km(168 miles), and 
the newspapers made much of it. The Gull was 
returned to Parkes by road and the tour continued, 
with further flights by all the members of the club 
investigating large areas of the plains north of Parkes. 
The return to Sydney was made on 9 January 1946. A
77

--- PAGE 80 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
total of 925km (573 miles) cross-country soaring had 
been achieved. Another tour with the Gull was under- 
taken at the turn of the years 1947-48. Early in the 
week, the Tiger Moth and also a de Havilland Dragon 
airliner, tied down on the aerodrome, were blown over 
and written off during a sudden storm. Fortunately a 
substitute Tiger Moth was made available by the RAAF. 
Successful experiments were made with a radio in the 
glider, but this excursion was only partly successful, 
the Gull being damaged after a few days in a ground- 
looping incident on take-off.
In Britain, soaring was permitted again only in 1946, 
although there was an illegal meeting at Sutton Bank 
during 1945. Most Gulls were impressed into military 
senice during the war, but those that survived re- 
emerged to serve with clubs and private owners.
Also among the Gulls flying post-war was the 
Slingsby Type 15 Gull 3, often called the Cantilever 
Gull. The strut had been eliminated, and the main wing- 
spars were suitably strengthened and the root fittings 
redesigned to join the two main spars directly together 
to carry the bending loads. The Type 15 had been under 
construction at the outbreak of war and was com- 
pleted and test flown during 1940. At this stage it was 
finished in the usual clear dope and varnish but sported 
RAF roundels. It gained a certificate of airworthiness 
in 1941 and was then stored until 1944, when it was 
bought by the famous racing driver Prince Bira of 
Siam. Bira worked as an ATC gliding instructor, and 
had opportunities to fly his Gull which were denied to 
civilian pilots at this time. He flew it illegally during a 
1945 Sutton Bank meeting. He had a special window 
fitted behind the cockpit where there was a small 
space between the wings. In this compartment he took 
his Highland terrier dog Tichiboo, or Titch, who 
accompanied him happily on all his flights.
According to contemporary reports the Gull 3, 
which Bira himself seems to have christened 
Kittiwakc, was at least equal in performance to the 
Olympia sailplanes which, from 1947, came to domi- 
nate the British soaring movement. In terms of aero- 
dynamic form, aspect ratio and wing profiles this was 
probably the case, though no serious comparative 
flight testing was ever done. The Gull 3 did not handle 
quite so well as the Olympia, but it was felt by many 
that Slingsby should have carried out his plans, 
announced in January 1945, to market the type with a 
revised cockpit canopy and landing wheel. If airbrakes 
had been added too, it would certainly have been a 
genuine competitor for the Olympia and could have 
been on the market at least a year sooner.
Apparently Bira crashed the Gull 3 badly, though the 
circumstances are obscure. Possibly this was the acci- 
dent which occurred when he was caught by unexpect- 
edly rough air when landing in an awkward spot on 
Dartmoor not far from his home at Bodmin. (By June 
li 46 he, in company with Titch, was flying the Minimoa 
which had belonged to Philip Wills. Bira eventually 
replaced this with a Weihe.j The wreck of the Gull 3 
was bought by Hawkridge Aircraft Ltd at Dunstable
and rebuilt, emerging in dark blue with a moulded 
cockpit canopy. It was then bought by members of the 
Oxford Gliding Club at Weston-on-the-Green, but fell 
out of use and was stored after 1971. After nearly '20 
years it was rescued by Mike Beach and totally 
restored, repainted in 'Bira Blue' to match the prince's 
racing colours and, except when being flown resides 
now at the Brooklands Museum, Weybridge, Surrey.
Only one Type 12 Gull of the original ten remains in 
service. This aircraft, BGA 378, was owned originally 
by W. Coleman of the mustard manufacturing family, 
but after his death in a wartime Hawker Hurricane 
accident it passed to A. Binfield and was then sold to 
the Derby & Lanes Gliding Club in 1949. It was flown in 
the National Competitions that year, as was the cross- 
Channel Gull, and BGA 378 flew also in the 1950 
contest. Following an incident in flight, when the 
cockpit canopy began to shed panels, this component 
was rebuilt with a more orthodox transparent bubble 
adapted from a General Aircraft Hotspur troop-trans- 
port glider, which spoiled the lines of the fuselage but 
gave the pilot a very much better view. The aircraft 
changed hands several times subsequently, but was 
never out of service for long. It has performed out- 
standingly well in the Competition Enterprise series, 
begun in 1974.
A Gull 1 is on display in the Royal Scottish Museum, 
Edinburgh, and the prototype, after serving with 
various groups in Australia, is in a museum in Perth, 
Western Australia. The American Gull is also still 
extant and may be restored to flying condition. Finally, 
a completely new Gull 3 has been built from the origi- 
nal drawings. The project was begun by Mike Garnett, 
and after his unexpected death it was taken over by a 
small group at the Blackpool and Fylde Gliding Club. 
With a moulded canopy and landing wheel, it was com- 
pleted in 1992, after more than ten years' part-time 
work.
Kirby Gull data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Wing sections:
Root
Tip 
Length o.a.
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
15.33m (50ft 3%in) 
14.86m2 (160ft2) 
15.8
NACA4416
RAF. 34 (modified)
6.61m (21ft 7in)
172.5kg (3841b) 
283.5kg(6241b) 
19.1kg/nr(3.911b/ft2)
Performance
Best glide ratio (estimate) 1:24
Gull 3: Similar, but tare weight approx. 190kg (4181b), 
wing loading 20kg/m2 (4. lib/ft2).
78

--- PAGE 81 ---
BGA378, with wheel, at the Derbyshire and Lancashire Club 
site at Camphill in 1949, showing the club's blue and white 
stripes on the rudder and the registration letters. Otherwise 
the finish was clear dope and varnish. This Gull, with mod­ 
ified cockpit canopy, still flies regularly. (M. Simons).
Gerard O. Smith with the Derby and Lanes Club Gull, receiv­ 
ing the Air League prize in 1938. The original form of cockpit 
canopy is visible. (C. Brown)
The Derbyshire and Lancashire Gliding Club's Kirby Gull, 
BGA378, flying at the 1938 National Gliding Competitions at 
Dunstable. This was the second Gull built. No spoilers were 
fitted at this time. (C. Brown)

--- PAGE 82 ---
The prototype Gull flying at Gawler, the base of the Adelaide 
Soaring Club, in South Australia, 1957. (Courtesy Adelaide 
Advertiser)
The modified prototype Gull soon after its arrival in Australia 
in 1939. The cockpit canopy and spoilers were brought up to 
the new standard before export. ( M. Waghorn)
The London Gliding Club's Gull being manhandled outside 
the hangar in 1950. It was withdrawn from use after 1964. 
(M. Eacock)
\

--- PAGE 83 ---
TYPE 12, KIRBY GULL
Prince Bira with the fuselage of the only Gull 3, which was 
named Kittiwake when he owned it. ( Wills collection)
The restored Gull 3 on winch launch at Camphill, 
Derbyshire. (M. Simons)
The Gull 3 wing root fittings, showing how the main spars 
were joined on the centreline with horizontal steel pins. 
(M. Simons)
81

--- PAGE 84 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
The prototype Kirby Gull in its museum shelter in Perth, 
West Australia. After several accidents, the front fuselage of 
the Australian Gull was rebuilt, without drawings, by Harry 
Schneider. (N. Wynne)
The cross-Channel Gull, BGA 380, at the National Gliding 
Championships at Camphill in August 1949. The tailplane 
has not yet been rigged. (G. Stephenson)

--- PAGE 85 ---
The cross-Channel Gull at Dunstable in 1949 with its 
registration letters added by law, to the disgust of the 
owners. (M. Eacock)
The restored Gull 3 at Booker (High Wycombe). Note the 
small window between the wings for Titch's aerial kennel. 
(M. Beach)
Dudley Hiscox flying the prototype Kirby Gull at Dunstable 
(C. Brown)

--- PAGE 86 ---
250'250310'320 34222
