sby soon decided that there was a future in 
glider manufacture, and he began to advertise under 
the heading, 'Slingsby Sailplanes, Scarborough'. The 
decision to abandon furniture manufacture altogether 
came in 1934 with a temporary shift to the disused 
Scarborough Corporation tram sheds, where there was 
more space for glider assembly. Eight more Falcons 
were built during the next few years after the move to 
Kirbymoorside, making a total of ten including the 
Falcon 2. One, of which nothing more is known, went 
to Canada. Three, including Slingsby's original, were 
written off at various gliding sites before the outbreak 
of the Second World War. The rest probably survived to 
be impressed for use by the Air Training Corps (ATC). 
One of these, piloted by a cadet, met its end in collision 
with a sheep at Camphill in Derbyshire about 1944. 
Others doubtless perished at other ATC schools. One 
was rebuilt with a flying-boat hull for the ATC to fly 
from Lake Windermere in 1943, and survives at the 
Windermere Steamboat Museum. Espin Hardwick's
12

--- PAGE 15 ---
TYPES 1 & 2, THE BRITISH FALCON
Falcon 2 was ceremonially burned at the Long Mynd 
following his death in 1955. (In Germany, one Falke 
survives. It was rescued from a Swiss Alpine mountain 
railway shed by Klaus Heyn and restored to museum 
standard by him.)
Mike Russell provided the initial inspiration for the 
construction during 1984-85 of an entirely new fully 
airworthy Falcon 1 by Ken Fripp's Southdown Aero 
Services at Lasham, using the original drawings 
rescued from Slingsby's loft. There were substantial 
contributions of work and financial support from John 
Sproule. The first flight was made in August 1986, with 
Derek Piggott at the controls. This Falcon, the only 
extant airworthy example, appears occasionally at 
vintage glider meetings in its clear-doped and var- 
nished finish like the original Slingsby Type 1.
Falcon 1 data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area* 
Aspect ratio 
Sweepback 
Length over all
Wing sections
Root
Mid-aileron
Tip
12.6m (42ft)
18.48m2 (198.9ft 2)
8.(>
12.5°
5.26m (17ft 5in)
Gottingen 585 modified 
Special reflexed 
Symmetrical
Weights (approximate)
Tare 
140kg (3081b)
Flying 
230kg (5061b)
Wing loading 
12.45kg/m2 (2.51b/ft2)
* The wing area given here was estimated from the
factory drawings. It differs from figures previously
stated, with consequent variations in aspect ratio and
wing loading. The German Falke was advertised with
tare weight 120kg (2651b).
The British Falcon in flight. (A. E. Slater)
Slingsby prepares for a bungee launch in his first sailplane, 
the British Falcon. The steel ring attached to the rubber rope 
is on the open hook at the nose. Ground crew hold the tail 
until the rope is stretched sufficiently to launch the sailplane. 
(Slingsby collection)
13

--- PAGE 16 ---
The 
last surviving 
German 
Falke 
on 
exhibition 
in 
Friedrichshafen in 1983. The aircraft was taken by its Swiss 
owners to the summit of a funicular railway to be flown from 
the mountain. It was abandoned there for many years until 
discovered and rescued by Klaus Heyn and restored by him. 
Swiss markings on one side, German on the other. 
(M. Simons).
The Falcon on bungee launch at Dunstable in 1935. 
Launches were made from the top of the hill directly into the 
slope upcurrent. (A. E. Slater)
Sixty years on, the modern replica of Slingsby's Falcon, built 
from the original drawings, is seen here at Dunstable in 
1991. (P. Warren.)

--- PAGE 17 ---
TYPES 1 & 2, THE BRITISH FALCON
The Falcon I modified for 
operations on and over Lake 
Windermere
The Falcon water glider in flight 
after a successful take off
15

--- PAGE 18 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
BRITISH FALCON 
A REPUCA OF THE RBSTGUDtR
BUILT BY F N SLINGSBY
WHICH LfAC TO TO F00MATON OF
SUMCSgT SAJLPUWS LTD
The replica Falcon, showing details of the cabane struts, 
skid and bracing wire. (M. Simons)
The British Falcon built in recent times, finished in clear dope 
and varnish like the original. (E. A. Hull]
Building the modern replica of the British Falcon at 
Southdown Air Services. (K. Fripp)

--- PAGE 19 ---
TYPES 1 & 2, THE BRITISH FALCON
Details of the replica Falcon's tail unit, showing struts, tailskid and control drive cables. (M. Simons)
The cockpit of the modern replica Falcon 1. Instruments 
were very rarely fitted to the original. Note the external 
aileron drive cables, rudder pedals and release knob for the
modern tow-hook. Instruments, from left to right: airspeed 
indicator, Cobb-Slater pellet-type variometer and altimeter. 
(M. Simons)

--- PAGE 20 ---
Slingsby
TypeS
Primary
(Dagling)
Drawn by Martin Simons 1994 ©
Reflexed tip ribs
Main wing section
view on 
underside
Square 
tips version

--- PAGE 21 ---
Type 3, Primary 
Glider (Dagling)
The primary glider originated in Germany in the early 
1920s, when that country was in economic chaos. To 
most who wanted to be pilots, powered flying schools 
were far too costly. There were a few two-seat gliders, 
but they were not cheap. It was found possible to teach 
beginners ab initio by a careful series of exercises in 
simple one-seat gliders, and the methods were devel- 
oped under the auspices of the RRG. Alexander 
Lippisch designed the Zogling (Pupil), which became 
the standard primary trainer. It was a monoplane with 
a rectangular wing spanning 10m. The fuselage, if it 
could be so called, was an A shaped frame forming a 
kingpost to carry the wing, with anchorage points for 
flying and landing wires and a gate-like extension to 
the tail, which was also wire braced. The seat and con- 
trols were mounted on a solid keel. It was common for 
the open 'primary' to be fitted with a light nacelle 
around the cockpit which reduced drag slightly and 
allowed it to be termed a 'secondary'. Slope soaring 
flights were possible, though when the wind was 
strong enough to give sufficient lift, the air was also 
usually too turbulent for the Zogling to be flown safely. 
Plans were 
distributed to 
gliding 
clubs and 
manufacturers produced Zoglings, or modified ver- 
sions, for sale.
A variation of the design was developed at the 
behest of Wolf Hirth. Instead of the wooden frame aft 
of the wing, a simpler structure of four steel tubes 
carried the tail. Drawings for this type found their way 
to the USA in 1929, where the National Glider 
Association (NGA) was establishing itself. When the 
EGA was founded later in the same year, copies of 
these blueprints were sent back across the Atlantic as 
an act of goodwill by the NGA. The London Gliding 
Club obtained a set.
R. F. Dagnall, founder of the RFD Company, already 
well established in building balloons and with experi- 
ence in airship construction, offered to build a glider 
for the London Gliding Club, and he was given these 
German/American plans of the modified Zogling to 
work with. Dagnall made some detailed changes, alter- 
ing all measurements from the metric system to the
Imperial, and produced what he called the Dagling. 
The prototype was flown by London Gliding Club 
members on 16 March 1930 at Guildford, and was 
taken 
at 
once 
to 
Aldbury, 
near 
Tring 
in 
Buckinghamshire, for further operations by the club.
About 28 RFD Daglings were produced during the 
following months, and all similar gliders built in Britain 
after this were called Daglings, irrespective of their 
origin. By 1932, however, Dagnall was heavily involved 
in government contract work, so he handed over the 
glider business to the British Aircraft Company (BAG), 
which had its own primary glider design on the market 
as well as some good intermediate sailplanes and a 
promising two-seater, the BAG VII. Unfortunately in 
May 1933 Lowe Wylde, the founder and chief designer, 
was killed when flying the Pianette, a powered version 
of the BAG VII. Robert Kronfeld, the famous soaring 
pilot, left his native Austria and took Lowe Wylde's 
place, and became interested in developing the Drone 
powered light aeroplane. Glider building by BAG 
ceased.
The changed directions of RFD and BAC gave Fred 
Slingsby an opportunity he was quick to seize. 
Production of primary gliders virtually identical to the 
Dagling began in Scarborough in 1933 and continued 
after the move to Kirbymoorside. Sixty-seven were 
built before the outbreak of the Second World War. (A 
few more Daglings were built by other companies, 
some even in post war years.) Slingsby would almost 
certainly have been unable to continue without the 
fairly steady sales of this type and the repair business 
that resulted.
The twin wing spars were solid timber planks set on 
edge and the ribs, all alike, were threaded over the 
spars before gluing. The extreme leading edge was 
covered with a fairing of plywood, the rest with fabric. 
Torsional resistance was provided by internal diagonal 
struts and wires. The A frame was made of solid 
timbers faced with plywood above the wing. The keel, 
shod with a strip of sheet steel and with no springing 
whatever, was similar, with strong external longitudi- 
nal stiffeners. The seat, a piece of heavy plywood with
19

--- PAGE 22 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
minimal hip and back support, was rigidly mounted on 
stout brackets above the keel with space below for the 
steel torque tube to a bell-crank behind the seat, oper- 
ating the aileron cables. The tailplane, larger than that 
of the Zogling, was bolted at the ends directly to the 
steel tubular supports. The fin, in two separate pieces, 
was mounted on the centre of the tailplane with more 
wire bracing to keep it upright. The control surfaces 
were mounted in the simplest manner, with wide gaps 
along the hinge lines.
Solo glider training involved a graded series of exer- 
cises, closely supervised by an instructor. Fritz Stamer 
and Lippisch of the RRG outlined the process in lec- 
tures and in a book which was published in translation 
in Britain in 1930. To start, ground slides and low hops 
would be made. The bungee, a V of rubber rope, was 
laid out with the steel ring at the apex hooked on to the 
glider's open hook at the extreme nose. Ropes with 
large knots at intervals were attached at the ends of the 
V for the launching crew to hold, and one or more 
persons would sit under the glider's tail to hold it back. 
All of the bungee crew would be trainees themselves, 
and so would learn something from watching others as 
well as from their own efforts when their turn came. 
The instructor, after briefing the pilot, gave the orders: 
'Walk.... Run....', and the rubber stretched. The force 
of the launch was controlled by judging the right 
moment to call the final command to the tail crew: 'Let 
go!' The glider would move forward, the ring falling off 
the hook as soon as the rubber tension was exhausted. 
Depending on the force, the glider would either slide 
along the ground for a short distance or take-off and 
glide down the gentle incline that was used for such 
training. After each attempt, instructor and pupil would 
confer before the next trial. After perhaps three or four 
such starts, another pupil would take the seat and the 
last would go to help with the bungee. Payment, in addi- 
tion to club membership fees, was in pence.
As skill and confidence increased, the launches 
would be made stronger until hops up to several feet 
above ground were achieved safely with short, smooth 
glides and landings, after which the Dagling would be 
taken to a bigger hill for longer flights until a straight 
glide of 30sec was achieved for the A certificate. After 
this, the pilot would learn to make turns in both direc- 
tions and keep the glider flying for a minute, to gain the 
B certificate. The C certificate, requiring a 5min soaring 
flight with a safe landing, could be done in a primary 
glider, but the pupil usually moved on to something 
better for this.
With the development of winch launching and auto- 
mobile towing, a modified system was used. This could 
be managed with a veiy small number of people, the 
instructor, a winch or car driver and two or three 
pupils to handle the 1 glider on the ground. The Dagling 
was first given a series of extended ground slides by 
being pulled along at less than flying speed. This taught 
the use of ailerons and rudder quite well, though not in 
a co-ordinated fashion. Some Daglings were modified 
for this procedure by ha\ing most of their wing fabric
removed and being fitted with wheels. (The author's 
own first 'flying' experience was on such a 'Penguin 1.)
For the first airborne hops, the tow speed was 
increased and it was then largely up to the winch or car 
driver to control the situation. With a complete novice 
the launch would be very gentle, and power would be 
cut almost as soon as the glider left the ground. Once 
this kind of hop was managed safely, the launch would 
be extended, the glider flying le\-el under tow a few feet 
off the ground from one side of the flying ground to the 
other. After this, progress would be made by climbing 
gently to some height and releasing the cable to glide 
down. (By now, releasable couplings as well as the 
open bungee hook were fitted to all gliders.) From this 
stage it was a matter of doing higher and higher hops 
with steeper climbs until turns could be managed. The 
requirement of a GOsec flight to complete the 'B' usually 
meant that the pupil would take a launch to several 
hundred feet above the ground and make a full gliding 
circuit, landing close to the take-off point. The experi- 
ence of doing a circuit in an open primary was not 
easily forgotten.
That was the theory. By 1930 Fritz Stamer was the 
most experienced gliding instructor in the world, 
running the Wasserkuppe RRG school with an efficient 
organisation, professionally staffed, with workshop 
facilities and craftsmen on site to repair damaged air- 
craft. The pupil was expected to stay for a whole 
summer season, flying (and working on the bungee) 
eveiy suitable day. According to Stamer, in 1929 there 
were 269 such pupils of whom 121 completed the B 
tests. The success rate after several months under 
expert guidance was 45 per cent. Those presenting 
themselves at the school were perhaps not always very 
talented, but they were keen enough to dedicate a 
season to the enterprise. The C soaring test was 
achieved by 30 of the best B pilots who stayed for an 
extra month; 11 per cent of the hopeful starters.
In the wholly amateur, part-time gliding clubs in 
Britain and most other countries, and indeed in most 
small German clubs, the RRG school's modest success 
rate was not approached.
The structure of the Dagling was simple, though club 
members found it difficult and frustrating to carry out 
repairs. Primary gliders were built or bought, broken, 
repaired, and broken again. A moderately heavy 
landing could cause the landing wires to snap or 
stretch, which required careful readjustments. Merely 
to rig or re-rig a primary could occupy a group of inex- 
perienced people the best part of a morning. Over- 
tightening any of the turnbuckles would cause 
misalignment. Worn or broken cables required perfect 
splicing, which few could do. Broken spars and struts 
and cracked plywood had to be repaired with accu- 
rately made scarf joints. The tubular tail supports of 
the Dagling were not often broken, but they could be 
bent or torn from their mountings. Selection of materi- 
als and quality of workmanship was no less important 
for these flying machines than for any other's.
It is not known how many pupil pilots joined a club,
20

--- PAGE 23 ---
TYPE 3, PRIMARY GLIDER (DAGLING)
did a few trial slides or hops and left for ever in sheer 
frustration. Of the 90 clubs listed as active in Britain in 
1930, barely a handful survived for a year. Slingsby s 
own initially enthusiastic group at Scarborough got a 
mere handful of student pilots to the A certificate and 
was in dire straits before 1932. Eventually, amalgama- 
tion with the Bradford club, which had itself absorbed 
the Leeds group and seen the demise of several others in 
the region, led to the formation of the Yorkshire Gliding 
Club. With a first-rate soaring site at Sutton Bank, this 
was one of the very few that survived and flourished.
It is also clear that many potentially good glider pilots 
were scared off by the solo training system, and some 
were seriously injured or killed. This continued even 
into the immediate post-Second World War years, when 
British clubs persisted with solo training. Despite 
careful advice by the instructor, almost anything could 
happen once the glider began to move. With the 
Dagling's sluggish ailerons and very sensitive elevator, a 
nervous trainee could pull up from what should have 
been a modest low hop to 20ft or more, stall, drop a wing 
and cartwheel, smashing the glider to matchwood.
Trainees airborne for the first time often felt they 
had been catapulted far higher than they really were. 
They knew only that the control stick should be moved 
forward to come down. They often dived back from 
10ft to hit the ground hard. The curved keel of the 
Dagling was just the right shape to throw the nose up 
again on contact, precipitating a series of violent and 
very noisy bounces. The unsprung keel and rigid seat 
transmitted every bump. A good many people left 
gliding sites with aching backs or necks which contin- 
ued to give trouble for years afterwards. Shaken and 
hurt by such experiences or even by seeing them 
happen to someone else, many decided that gliding 
was not for them.
More serious and even fatal injuries did happen. 
When experiencing 'negative g* for the first time, as 
Derek Piggott has described, an automatic reflex 
response to the sensation causes some pupil pilots to 
push the control stick hard forward. The moment of 
transition from climbing fairly steeply on the winch 
launch to gliding down in a Dagling, if done rather
clumsily, produced exactly this result. Those watching 
never knew why some pupils dived vertically, or even 
beyond the vertical, into the ground.
The cheapest possible training method was devel- 
oped and applied in Germany under the pressure of 
financial disaster. It seems clear that if, instead of fol- 
lowing the RRG system, gliding organisations had 
stretched their capital a little more and purchased two- 
seaters with dual controls, the gliding and, more 
importantly, the soaring movement, even during a 
great economic depression, would have done a great 
deal better. Satisfactory two-seater sailplanes did 
exist, and although they were more costly in the short 
term they would have been cheaper as well as more 
effective over a slightly longer period. They would 
have been less often broken, more pupils would have 
remained in the clubs and succeeded. Income from 
flying fees would have been greater. Yet, as remarked 
above, it is doubtful if Slingsby Sailplanes would have 
survived had there not been a steady trade in new 
Daglings, Dagling spares and repairs.
Primary Glider (Dagling) data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
10.35m (34ft)
Wing area 
15.06m2 (162ft2)
Aspect ratio 
7.1
Wing section: often stated to be Gottingen 326, but this
does not seem to be correct. The Go 326 was a 1918
Pfalz biplane section, 8.1 per cent thick and quite
unlike that of the Dagling or Zogling wing. The section
shown on the drawing here is taken from the Slingsby
plans.
Length o.a. 
5.45m (17ft lO&in)
Weights
Tare 
82kg(1801b)
Flying 
173kg(3801b)
Wing loading 
11.5kg/m2 (2.351b/ft2)
A Dagling-type primary glider in Australia, probably built by 
the Larkin Aircraft Co of Melbourne in 1930. The design dif- 
fered in minor details from the RFD product.
21

--- PAGE 24 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
Serious accidents did happen. The wreck of a nacelled 
primary, apparently on the hill at Dunstable. (Charles E. 
Brown. RAF Museum. Hendon. neg No. 5835-12)
An RFD Dagling at Balsdean, near Brighton, in October 
1931, when the BGA held a glider meeting on the South 
Downs. The pupil pilot is Barbara Siever, probably a member 
of the short-lived Brighton Gliding Club.
Slingsby Type 3 Primary with the Golden Eagle emblem at 
Dunstable. The Falcon 3 two-seater is approaching to land 
in the background.
Captain Hope inspects the RFD Dagling at Balsdean in 
October 1931. The sailplane in the background is Bill 
Manuel's Crested Wren

--- PAGE 25 ---
Assembling the Primary in the Scarborough tram sheds. The 
inadequate working conditions are obvious. (Slingsby 
collection)
In the tram shed Slingsby himself works under the wing as 
one of his workers varnishes the leading edges. The cover- 
ing fabric was usually madapolam, a lightweight cotton 
material, doped and varnished. (Slingsby collection)

--- PAGE 26 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
Primary glider in flight. (A. E. Slater)
A nacelled primary glider in flight. The shape of the nacelle is 
slightly different from that of the standard Slingsby design. 
The glider was built by the Hawkridge Aircraft Co at 
Dunstable in 1947. (M. Simons)
A Slingsby Type 3 primary glider in flight in 1940. It was 
recognised that cadet pilots could be trained on gliders and 
the RAF investigated. This led eventually to the Air Training 
Corps gliding programme.

--- PAGE 27 ---
TYPE 3, PRIMARY GLIDER (DAGLING)
Slingsby nacelled primary with 
rounded wingtips at Dunstable. 
(A. E. Slater)
Harold Holdsworth, ground engi- 
neer of the Yorkshire Gliding 
Club from 1934 to 1939, at the 
controls of a Slingsby Type 3 
Primary 
glider 
in 
1936. 
(H. Holdsworth)
25

--- PAGE 28 ---
Cabane strut 
sections
600———600———600—1320
-400^-480—400^——722
Slingsby
Type 4
Falcon 3
Wing sections, outer panels
V strut
details
Scale x 1
Drawn by Martin Simons

--- PAGE 29 ---
Type 4, 
the Falcon 3
Birmingham stockbroker Espin Hardwick was so 
enthusiastic about his modified Falcon single-seater 
that in 1934 he persuaded Slingsby, with promises of 
financial support, to build a two-seat version. It is most 
unlikely that Slingsby himself would have originated 
such a project. The structure of the Falcon was not 
straightforward, and even if he had conceived of a two- 
seater, which he might have done, there were simpler 
models that could be built under licence or copied, 
such as the Kassel SK-3 Hercules, well known in 
Yorkshire, or even Rex Stedman's homebuilt two- 
seater TS-1, christened City of Leeds, which emerged 
in July 1934 and soared successfully. But what 
Hardwick wanted was, so far as either of them knew, 
the first two-seater sailplane in the world with the seats 
arranged side by side. Until this time two-seat gliders 
all had tandem seats. The only exception was a biplane 
which had been flown in 1922 by Anthony Fokker.
Slingsby admitted that the transformation of the 
solo Falcon was a formidable job, for he had to work 
on the drawings single-handedly and had no previous 
experience of aircraft design. He pored over his 
drawing board for several months, often late into the 
night, and sent his plans to the BGA technical commit- 
tee for stress checking before the end of the year. 
Unlike the Stedman project, BGA approval was given 
without the need for any modifications. Work on the 
Falcon 3 then began in the factory sheds in 
Kirbymoorside, rented at very low rate from the owner, 
Major J. E. D. Shaw, who also owned the adjacent agri- 
cultural engineering works.
In almost every respect the two-seater was simply an 
enlargement of the original Lippisch Falke, the wing 
area and span being increased to retain a wing loading 
not too much more than that of the single-seater while 
keeping much the same general proportions. The pro- 
files, sweepback and washout angles, and even the 
little 'gull' kink in the wing, were all the same as those 
of the single-seater. The wingtips were rounded like 
those of Hardwick's Falcon 2, but the prototype fuse- 
lage, widened to take two seats under the wing, was 
fabric covered aft of the cockpit. The only other sub-
stantial change in layout was the addition of a rectan- 
gular centre-section of wing on a cabane of four verti- 
cal struts, cross-braced with wires, with carry-through 
spars. The main wing panels were attached individu- 
ally with horizontal pins to this centrepiece. The gaps 
on either side of the centre section were faired with 
plywood strips.
Slingsby would probably have seen drawings of the 
German Falke R Va, an improved version of the 
Lippisch Falke which had adopted a similar layout and 
rigging system. Also, in 1933 information was pub- 
lished in the journal Sailplane and Gliding about the 
German single-seat Superfalke, with a stretched 
wingspan of 16.8m (55.4ft), nearly as much as the 
Falcon 3 turned out to be. Evidently there was nothing 
seriously wrong with the idea of an enlarged Falcon, 
though it cannot have been reassuring to read, a few 
months later, that the Superfalke had broken up in the 
air while on aero tow. This, however, was explained by 
pointing out that the elevator had been of the all- 
moving or 'pendulum' type, sensitive to clumsy han- 
dling by an inexperienced pilot.
There was nothing wrong with the Falcon 3 when 
Hardwick took delivery of the prototype in May 1935. 
All the safe stability and handling characteristics of the 
Falcon 1 were retained, although the big sailplane was 
heavier on all the controls. The performance was 
surprisingly good, and Slingsby received orders for 
more. The later ones had fuselages covered entirely 
with plywood, and to improve the upward view trans- 
parent plastic strips were used instead of plywood to 
fair the gaps in the wing roots. The centre section, too, 
was provided with celluloid transparencies, though 
these did not last long in service and were usually 
replaced by doped fabric like the rest of the wing. 
Drop-off dolly wheels were fitted to facilitate ground 
handling and take-off. After these and some other 
minor modifications another eight Falcons were pro- 
duced, seven to orders from all the leading British 
clubs, and one exported to Belgium. The last of the line 
was added to the BGA register in December 1938.
Five British sailplanes, including a Falcon 3, went to
27

--- PAGE 30 ---
Murray (left) and Fox after setting the two-seater duration 
record in the Falcon 3 at the Wasserkuppe in 1937. The 
registration letters G-AAAE were allocated only for the over­ 
seas trip. The contest number 19 was painted on the nose. 
(Slingsby collection)
the first international championships, held on the 
Wasserkuppe in July 1937. The Falcon pilots were W. B. 
Murray and J. S. Fox. The Federation Aeronautique 
Internationale (FAI) had only recently instituted a 
special record category for two-seaters, and Murray 
and Fox on 12 July made a flight of 9hr 48min which 
was recognised as the first record in the new category. 
(A solo duration record of more than 36hr had been set 
by Schmidt in 1933, so no great fuss was made.)
Austrian and German pilots soon reclaimed the 
record. By the end of June 1938 it exceeded 21hr. 
Murray broke it again, with J. S. Sproule, during the 
British national competitions at the London Gliding 
Club site at Dunstable. The club Falcon 3 was launched 
by winch just after 4 a.m. on 9 July to soar back and 
forth in the slope lift all day and into the night. The 
pilots took turns to fly and were helped by moonlight, 
the sidelights of spectators' cars along the hill top and a 
searchlight directed on to the windsock outside the 
hangar. The landing, aided by car headlights, came 
after '2'2\\r 13min. A great deal of public interest had 
been aroused by radio news bulletins during the flight, 
and Murray and Sproule were welcomed by a crowd 
and subjected to interrogation by the press. As an 
international record this, too, did not last long. German 
pilots raised it to more than 50hr by the end of the year.
By any standards the Falcon 3 was a remarkable 
sailplane, well liked, spectacular in appearance, yet 
based on a 1929 original design obsolescent, in 
German eyes at least, before it was even built. 
Nonetheless, it is a pity that more were not produced at 
a time when the British gliding movement could and 
probably should have used two-seaters much more 
systematically for ab initio pilot training. The regular 
use of these practical, soarable, safe if rather ponder- 
ous two-seat sailplanes would have benefited the 
British clubs greatly if the solo training system had 
been less entrenched. Some fortunate trainees did 
occasionally get some extended soaring experience 
with an instructor, but the Falcons, though immensely 
popular for joyriding, were rarely used as they might
Murray (left) and Sproule in the Falcon 3 at Dunstable on the 
occasion of the 22hr two-seat duration record in 1938. Note 
the external aileron drive cables, transparent panels in the 
centre section, and crossed wire bracing behind the cockpit. 
( J. S. Sproule)
have been. It was said that the stability of the type was 
such that a pupil could not gain as much as might be 
learned from a less docile aircraft. Even so, most 
pupils, given the chance, would surely have preferred 
to fly safely with an instructor alongside rather than 
beating Daglings to pieces in a seemingly endless 
series of more or less shattering ground hops.
The Falcons remained in service with the clubs until 
the Second World War. One was written off in a crash 
before the rest were impressed, along with many other 
gliders, for use by the ATC. It is not clear how many 
survived, but in 1944 the BGA magazine Sailplane and 
Glider reported that four or five remained serviceable. 
One of the last was severely damaged in a ground- 
looped landing at Bramcote Royal Naval Air Station, 
near Nuneaton, Warwickshire, in 1947. This was during 
the first post-war national championships, although 
the Falcon was not competing. Rumour has it that two, 
or parts of two, were burned in South Wales in the early 
1960s.
Falcon 3 data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area* 
Aspect ratio 
Wing sections:
Root
Mid-aileron
Tip 
Length o.a.
17.69m (58ft) 
27.4m2 (294.8ft-) 
11.4
Gottingen 535 modified 
Special reflexed profile 
Symmetrical 
6.74m(22ftlin)
Weights
Tare 
227kg (5001b)
Flying 
408kg (8991b)
Wing loading 
14.9kg/nr (3.051b/ft2)
* The wing area given here was estimated from the
factory drawings. It differs from figures previously
stated, with consequent variations in aspect ratio and
wing loading.
28

--- PAGE 31 ---
Falcon 3 in ATC paint scheme taking a winch launch somewhere in England. Note the apparent gap at the wing root was 
closed with transparent plastic. Signs of wing damage and repairs may be seen.
Assembling a Falcon 3 in Slingsby's factory in 
Kirbymoorside village. (Slingsby collection)
The Falcon 3 at the hangar door at Dunstable. The building 
was designed by architect and glider pilot Christopher 
Nicholson and is now the subject of a preservation order.
The Slingsby Type 4 Falcon 3 at Dunstable in July 1937 prior 
to competing 
in the International Championships in 
Germany. The official registration letters were added for the 
trip.

--- PAGE 32 ---
in
CO
Wing section
Gottingen 535
root and centre panels
Outer wing 
sections
V
-1
0 
0
<n ,
0 
O 
CO
O 
O 
CO
O 
O 
CO
O 
0 
CO
Slingsby
TypeS
Grunau Baby 2
Drawn by Martin Simons 1992

--- PAGE 33 ---
Type 5, 
the Grunau Baby 2
More examples of the Grunau Baby were built than of 
any other type of sailplane before or since (discounting 
primary gliders, which were not intended for soaring 
and so were not strictly termed sailplanes). There was 
mass production in Germany until 1945, and in other 
European countries under German occupation during 
the Second World War. Fairly reliable factory records 
suggest that at least 4,000 were produced between 
1931 and 1945, though more than twice this total has 
been claimed. Production figures for other outstand- 
ingly successful types such as the Ka 6 series, reached 
nothing like these totals.
The Grunau Baby was also built from plans and kits 
by amateurs all over the world, and under licence in 
almost every countiy where there were any glider 
manufacturers. Substantial numbers of various marks, 
sometimes disguised under new names, were produced 
in Sweden, Switzerland, France, Spain, Yugoslavia, 
West Germany and Britain in the post-war period.
The Grunau Baby 2 became the Slingsby TVpe 5. 
About 15 were built at Kirbymoorside between 1935 
and 1939, some for export, and an unknown number of 
kits was also produced. Others were built in Britain 
from plans during the same period.
Grunau, renamed Jesow after 1945, is in Silesia, 
which today remains part of Poland. The village is a 
strassetidorf, a simple row of cottages along each side 
of the country road, typical of the area. Nearby was 
Hirschberg (Stag mountain), now called Jelenia Gora, 
on the margins of the Riesengebirge Highlands. In 
1923, on the slopes close to the village, Silesian gliding 
enthusiasts established a gliding school, and they 
invited Gottlob Espenlaub, a cabinetmaker who had 
made a reputation as a sailplane builder and pilot, to 
join them and take charge. He brought with him 
Edmund Schneider, another qualified craftsman. 
Espenlaub moved on after three years, but Schneider 
married a local girl and remained. The glider factory 
was established in 1928, trading as Edmund Schneider, 
Grunau, or ESG. At first the chief business was build- 
ing and repairing Grunau 9 primary gliders, but 
Schneider designed several successful sailplanes, the
designs being numbered according to the year. Early in 
1931 came the ESG 31 Stanavo. This was a relatively 
simple and inexpensive strut-braced sailplane for the 
American pilot Jack O'Meara, named after a brand of 
aviation fuel marketed in Europe by the company 
O'Meara represented, Standard Oil of New Jersey. The 
Stanavo attracted favourable attention at the 
Wasserkuppe competitions, although it was not 
intended to compete with the very superior and costly 
sailplanes flown by the recognised champions.
The first Grunau Baby was a smaller version of the 
Stanavo. Its wing, of only 12.87m (42.2ft) span had a 
planform similar to that used by the sailplanes of the 
Akaflieg Darmstadt (Academic Flying Group of the 
Darmstadt Technical University). A series of advanced 
soaring craft, the Darmstadt 1, Westpreussen, Lore, 
Musterle, Schloss Mainberg and others, had emerged 
from the Darmstadt school. All had fully cantilevered 
high aspect ratio wings of about 16m (52.5ft) span. A 
few years previously the advantages of elliptical wings 
had been proved by Ludwig Prandtl and his staff at 
Gottingen University, and the Darmstadt sailplanes 
achieved a very effective compromise with this ideal 
planform. The inner half of the wing had constant 
chord, but the outer panels tapered, the trailing edges 
curving to approximate an ellipse.
Although the Grunau Baby was not expected or 
intended to perform as well as th