very and great 
loss of height. As before, this characteristic showed 
itself only occasionally. The obvious solution was to 
restrict the e.g. to a safe forward position by fixing 
some ballast permanently in the nose.
The repeated testing and modifications delayed 
progress. A year after the new type had been 
announced and the first provisional orders accepted, 
Slingsby's advertisements early in 1962 stated that this 
was the training two-seater for the next decade, but 
none had yet been sold. Still more delays followed. The 
T-49 was criticised for having a rudder that required 
hard work for little effect, the stalling behaviour with 
e.g. aft was still somewhat alarming, and when the 
pilots were out of the cockpit the weight on the tail 
lifting bar was too great for easy ground handling. 
When it was finally approved for certification the 
Capstan had a taller fin and rudder and the wheel posi­ 
tion was moved aft to take weight off the tail. The T-49 
became ready for regular service only towards the end 
of 1962.
With additional grants from the Central Council of 
Physical Recreation and the Ministry of Education the 
BGA could pay for a National Coach, and John Everitt 
was appointed to this position. A programme of Coach 
and Capstan tours was set up as soon as the two-seater
200

--- PAGE 203 ---
TYPE 49, CAPSTAN
became available, handicapped at first by the worst 
winter weather ever experienced. Once the snows 
melted in 1963 the tours continued with hardly a break. 
Apart from visits to some 22 clubs during the year, 
Everitt 
flew 
hors 
concours 
in 
the 
National 
Championships in late May and early June, and in the 
Northern Regionals a month later, to give competition 
cross-country experience to selected club instructors 
who had not had the chance to do such flying before.
One effect of this programme was that club pilots all 
over Britain had the opportunity to fly the T-49A and to 
see how it might fit in to their operations. Everitt 
himself was very pleased with the aircraft. He liked the 
side-by-side seating and the excellent view, but made it 
clear in his writings that any club which relied on low- 
powered launching apparatus, as many still did, would 
find the Capstan unsuitable. Compared with the old, 
slow T-21 the T-49 would not climb well on a feeble 
winch launch. It weighed about 90kg (1981b) more than 
the T-21, and had a stalling speed of 32kt instead of 28. 
Even compared with the Eagle, the Capstan had a 
higher wing loading and a greater all-up weight. For 
clubs which had powerful winches and sites with 
ample space to lay out long cables, and especially if 
aero-towed launches were available, the Capstan was 
eminently suitable, and it was excellent for teaching 
map reading and navigation on cross-country flights.
With further minor modifications the T-49B entered 
production in July 1963, the first aircraft off the pro­ 
duction line going in September to the Lasham Gliding 
Centre. Sponsored by the brewers, Watney's, it was 
christened Red Barrel, and was followed soon after­ 
wards by two more. Thirty-two Capstans were built 
and sold, which was a moderate success, but the objec­ 
tive of replacing all the old T-21 and T-31 trainers was 
never achieved. Many clubs continued to use the T-21 
for another decade or more.
In 1962, in an article in Sailplane and Gliding, 
Derek Piggott suggested that training methods for 
glider pilots should in future rely on simple self-launch­ 
ing two-seaters which would have motors for take-off 
and taxying but which would be flown as gliders for the 
majority of their time in the air. He worked out the 
likely costs and illustrated the article with a photo­ 
graph of a model Capstan with the engine mounted on 
a pylon behind the cockpit. A McCulloch four-cylinder 
two-stroke motor of 72bhp was suggested. He returned 
to the basic idea two years later, and serious efforts 
were made to launch a company to produce such an 
aircraft. A revised drawing showed a Capstan with a 
motor in the nose and an orthodox undercarriage. 
Slingsby's were interested and took over the project. 
The powered Capstan T-49C, with a 45hp Nelson 
motor, made its first flights in February 1968. The 
engine was mounted on a pylon, as in Piggott's original 
scheme. The thrust line of the propeller was high, the 
motor was not very powerful for a total flying weight 
with two pilots of 612kg (l,3501b), and the standard 
undercarriage of a single wheel and forward skid was 
retained. The necessary development work proceeded
slowly. Only one T-49C was built, and this prototype, 
together with the last ordinary Capstan on the produc­ 
tion line, was destroyed in the factory fire of November 
1968.
The Capstan never did become the standard club 
training aircraft in Britain, and it was not very popular 
overseas. Two T-49 kits were exported to New Zealand 
for assembly there, five went to Burma and one to 
Pakistan. As an indication of the kind of market of 
which Slingsby's share was so small, production of the 
contemporary Ka 7 in Germany reached 511 between 
1957 and 1966, and examples appeared all over the 
world. The Ka 7 was replaced by the Ka 13, of which 
585 were sold before 1977. (Some have been built more 
recently under licence.) Simultaneously there was very 
large production of Blaniks; 100 being sold in Australia 
alone. Other successful two-seaters came from other 
factories and other countries, the Schweizer 2-22 in the 
USA, the French Bijave, the Polish Bocian, and so on.
Type 49 Capstan data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a. 
Wing sections
Root
Tip
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
16.78m (55.05ft)
20.43m2 (220ft2)
13.78
8.13m (26.67ft)
NACA633 620
NACA 6412 (modified)
345kg (7611b) 
567kg (l,2501b) 
27.7kg/m2 (5.71b/ft2)
The prototype Capstan at the factory, showing the original, 
smaller, vertical tail. (Slingsby collection)
201

--- PAGE 204 ---
The Capstan being prepared for a test flight. The large trans­ 
parent canopy, hinged at the back, was thought at first to be
vulnerable to damage, but proved quite serviceable in prac- 
A Capstan approaching to land at the 1992 vintage glider 
tice. (Slingsby collection.) 
rally at Terlet in the Netherlands. (M. Simons.)
With two pilots on board, the Capstan rested on its wheel 
and front skid. On landing, once flying speed was lost the 
skid acted as a brake, but the wheel was also equipped with 
a brake, allowing very short landing run.
The prototype Capstan flown solo at Button Bank during the 
preliminary test flight programme. (Slingsby collection.)
202

--- PAGE 205 ---
A Capstan on the ground at Dunstable. (M. Simons.)
The tail unit of the Capstan was unusual for a Slingsby air­ 
craft, with the tailplane mounted behind the fin and the 
rudder above it. This may have contributed to the spin recov­ 
ery problem in the prototype, but caused no difficulties with 
the T-49B. (M. Simons.)
In side view the Capstan was quite elegant, and the addi­ 
tional drag caused by the wide cockpit was not a serious 
fault. The cockpit was entirely ahead of the wing, allowing an 
exceptionally good field of vision. (M. Simons.)

--- PAGE 206 ---
Root NACA 63 620
Tip NACA 6415
Aileron hinge 
and horn
Aileron mass 
balance
Slingsby Type 50
Skylark 4

--- PAGE 207 ---
Type 50, Skylark 4
The date of the first flight of the Skylark 4 is given in 
several references as February 1961, but the first 
public announcement of the new type's existence was 
in February 1962. In May of that year the Skylark 4 
began to appear on the BGA register, and the earliest 
report on its flying characteristics was published in 
June, when production began in earnest. None of the 
workshop plans on which the accompanying three- 
view drawing is based is dated earlier than 1962, 
except where components from the Skylark 3 were 
used.
Aerodynamically and structurally, the Skylark 4 was 
a straightforward development from later versions of 
the T-43 Skylark 3. The wing, still of the three-piece 
type, was mounted on the fuselage in the same way, 
two long pins inserted from the front connecting both 
front and rear wing fittings to the main frames. The 
centre section was almost unchanged, with the normal 
type of parallel-ruler airbrakes. The 20 per cent thick 
NACA six-digit section had the advantage of a wide 
operating range of low drag, and the great thickness of 
the wing at the root allowed a deep spruce spar to be 
used without the need for special reinforcement. The 
materials used on the earlier Skylarks were retained; 
gaboon plywood for the skin, with a machined spruce 
leading edge carefully faired to preserve the laminar 
boundary layer over the forward third of the chord. 
The tip panels carried the long-span ailerons of narrow 
chord which had been proved on the Skylark 3G.
The only important aerodynamic change to the wing 
was the use of the NACA 6415 aerofoil section, 6 per 
cent cambered and 15 per cent thick, at the tip. For a 
modern sailplane this was a very strongly cambered 
section. At airspeeds above 90kt the outer wing of the 
Skylark 3, with 3° of aerodynamic washout and the 4 
per cent cambered NACA 4415 profile, began to bend 
down, indicating that the tips were forced to operate at 
negative angles of attack. Considerable loss of glide 
ratio at these speeds resulted. The new tip section 
allowed the T-50 to fly at 108kt without any reversal of 
the tip loads, and a noticeable improvement in the 
ability to fly fast between thermals. The higher
maximum lift coefficient of the strongly cambered 
profile prevented tip stalling at low speeds without any 
aerodynamic washout.
The fuselage of the T-50 was a great improvement on 
the earlier design. Instead of the fairly high neck which 
had been a feature of all Slingsby high-performance 
sailplanes since the Gull 4, the new fuselage was a 
simple streamlined form of oval cross-section through­ 
out, with a reclined seating position for the pilot. The 
height and cross-sectional area of the fuselage were 
much reduced, which had the additional advantage 
that the ground crew did not have to lift the heavy wing 
centre-section so high when assembling the aircraft. 
The cockpit canopy, accurately moulded over a male 
form rather than being blown, improved the airflow 
over the nose considerably compared with the rather 
bulbous shape of the earlier type, although Slingsby 
did not return to the fully contoured shape that had 
been used long ago for the T-12 Gull. Visibility from the 
cockpit of the Skylark 4 was exceptionally good. As 
before, the sailplane was offered with or without a 
wheel, though hardly any without the wheel were pro­ 
duced. The tail unit was taken without change from the 
Skylark 3G, and there was no greater use of glassfibre 
reinforced plastic components than in the earlier type.
The T-50 handled well and was lighter on all the con­ 
trols than the earlier models of the Skylark 3, and had a 
noticeable edge in performance. Slingsby's advertise­ 
ments stated that it was the most advanced 18m 
contest sailplane available as a standard production 
aircraft. Although this was strictly true, it did not nec­ 
essarily imply that it was the most advanced sailplane 
available from any factory. In Poland the Zefir 2, under 
development since 1960, was in production. Plastic 
foam and plywood sandwich skins were used together 
with glassfibre shells. The pilot lay supine rather than 
sitting in the cockpit, giving the fuselage a very refined 
aerodynamic form with a retracting wheel. The wings 
carried Fowler flaps. A parachute airbrake, normally 
stowed in a tailcone, was standard. This was techni­ 
cally a much more advanced sailplane than anything 
Slingsby had produced. It spanned 17m rather than
2O5

--- PAGE 208 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
18m which allowed Slingsby to make the above claim. 
Indeed, to most ordinaiy glider pilots the Zefir seemed 
too complex, but it pointed the way ahead, whereas the 
Skylark 4 marked the end of a series.
The advantage the British aircraft retained lay in 
price. Like its predecessors, the Skylark 4 was simple 
in design, used no costly materials or complicated 
methods of construction, was robust and easily 
repaired and it did perform well. When a reliable polar 
curve became available from flight tests by Dick 
Johnson in the USA, the best glide figure was 36.3, a 
worthwhile improvement over the Skylark 3F, though 
the glide at high speeds was not as good as the figures 
claimed by the factory. It was also widely believed that 
Johnson had done a lot of work on his Skylark, clean­ 
ing up details and sealing small gaps to achieve the 
figures he reported.
The Skylark 4 was never regarded as particularly 
fast, having a modest wing loading of 23.35kg/m2 
(4.561b/ft2 ). It was designed for British pilots accus­ 
tomed to using rather weak thermals. Elsewhere, 
sailplanes with higher wing loadings were appearing. 
The Zefir's figure was 28.9kg/m2 (5.91b/ft2). In the USA 
the all-metal Sisu had a wing loading of 32.05kg/m2 
(6.571b/ft2), and the HP 11, also metal, was equipped to 
carry water ballast for a maximum wing loading of 
39kg/m2 (81b/ft2). The attitude of most British pilots in 
11)62 was that these 'hot ships' or 'lead sleds' were all 
very fine for soaring in the strong thermals of Texas or 
Eastern Europe on record-setting days, but they would 
never survive long in humid British air. It was believed 
that the Skylark would score consistently in competi­ 
tions, winning the difficult days and doing well enough 
on the occasional very good day, and so heading the list 
at the end of a competition week.
The first real test of the Skylark 4 in competition 
came at the 1963 World Championships at Junin in 
Argentina. Many lessons were learned. The weather 
was mixed, some days being relatively poor and 
similar to English conditions. There were some great 
thunderstorms which a few pilots used to climb, sur­ 
rounded by lightning, to 6,000m (20,OOOftJ only to have 
the subsequent glide spoilt by heavy icing and naviga­ 
tion made impossible. On other days strong thermals 
were ideal for heavy, fast sailplanes. After seven days 
Skylark 4s were placed 8th, 9th, 10th and llth in the 
'Open Class', Zefirs 1st, 2nd and 5th, the HP 11 from the 
USA was 3rd and the Sisu 4th. It was a triumph for the 
'hot ships'. The SB-7, an 'all-glass' sailplane built by the 
students of Akaflieg Braunschweig, did not do particu­ 
larly well.
After the contest the British team spoke with almost 
a single voice. The Skylarks could survive in poor 
weather, but they did not always win even then. The 
'lead sleds' could usually keep up or overtake. They 
used their good glides at high airspeeds to search 
larger volumes of air, and could find the few better 
thermals which existed even on these difficult days. A 
Skylark might be climbing steadily but slowly in weak 
lift which an experienced Zefir or Sisu pilot would fly
through without turning. The Skylarks lingered in bad 
patches which the fast aircraft ignored altogether or 
flew round. Stronger lift could usually be discovered a 
few kilometres further on. If the better thermal was not 
there after all, the heavier sailplane might have to 
struggle or land out, but with flaps deployed and plenty 
of skill a heavy sailplane could nearly always surpass 
the Skylark's cross-country-speed. On the really good 
days, the Skylark pilots became used to seeing the 
competition disappearing rapidly into the distance, 
and they had no chance of catching them. Frank Irving, 
in cautious retrospect wrote: 'It is just possible that, 
even in England, a bit more wing loading would be a 
good idea, but we may have to relearn how to soar'.
Soon afterwards, in May 1963, Dick Johnson seemed 
to give the lie to these new beliefs when he won the US 
Nationals at Elmira in New York State. Perhaps 
because of this result several more Skylarks were 
exported to the USA during the next few months. 
Johnson, however, was one of the most experienced 
sailplane pilots in the world, and his win was thought 
to be due to his greater skill rather than to his aircraft. 
He had a long string of previous wins to his credit. He 
followed his success with another win in the following 
year at McCook in Nebraska, where it was expected 
that the heavy, fast sailplanes would do particularly 
well. The weather was untypical, favouring light 
sailplanes. The Ka 6CR filled four of the top six places 
and a Sisu flown by A. J. Smith came third. The other 
two Skylarks in this competition placed 23rd and 37th.
At about this time, George Moffatt, a future World 
Champion, wrote of the Skylark 4 that although it 
handled very well and was comfortable, its per­ 
formance was disappointing, very little superior to the 
Ka 6, and he found fault with the finish and detail 
design. The price advantage remained. Philip Wills had 
described the Skylark 4 as 'among the most lovely air­ 
craft of all time', and took delivery of one of the first off 
the production line. Others in Britain followed his 
example, and three kits went to New Zealand and 
several others were exported. Production reached 66, 
one more than the entire output of all versions of the 
Skylark :3. The total of all marks of Skylark including 
the two little Skylark Is of 1953, was just short of 200.
Meanwhile, things were not developing happily at 
Kirbymoorside. Fred Slingsby himself was ageing, and 
after 1962 was in poor health. He had some heart 
trouble and retired at the age of 70 in 1964. For 
complex legal reasons the Shaw Slingsby Trust which 
had been established after the death of J. E. D. Shaw in 
1955 had to be wound up, and the majority share­ 
holdings which the Trust held had to be placed on the 
market. It was not even certain that production of 
gliders at Slingsby would continue under the new own­ 
ership.
i.'06

--- PAGE 209 ---
TYPE 5O, SKYLARK 4
Type 50 Skylark 4 data
Dimensions 
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a. 
Wing sections
Root
Tip
Weights 
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
18.2m (59.7ft)
1&1m2 (173.3ft2)
2057
7.69m (25.23ft)
NACA63 3 63) 
NACA6415
256kg (564b) 
376kg (829lb) 
23.35kg/m2 (4.56b/ft2)
The Skylark 4 destined for Philip Wills in flight over 
Hampshire in 1962. (Charles E. Brown, RAF Museum, 
Hendon, negNo. P100736)
2O7

--- PAGE 210 ---
Geoffrey Stephenson's Skylark 4 at Dunstable. (M. Simons)
A much modified Skylark 4 in Australia. The cockpit canopy 
was altered to improve the contours, and a retractable wheel 
was fitted. (M. Simons)
In the USA, Dick Johnson took delivery in May 1963 and 
twice won the National Championships in his Skylark 4, reg­ 
istered N7997A. (R. J. Johnson)

--- PAGE 211 ---
Wills's Skylark 4 at Dunstable. In the background is a 
Slingsby T-34 Sky. (M. Simons)
Charles Benson flew a Skylark 4 in Britain until it was sold to 
Australia in 1967, when it was registered VH-GTB. 
(M. Simons)
Skylark 4 N74876 in the USA. (N. Ellison)

--- PAGE 212 ---
Fuselage datum
Aileron hinge 
detail
Original wing
root 
f-1040
Root section
NACA64 618
o
Tip section
NACA643 615
<D
Slingsby 
Type 51 
Dart 15
Drawn by Martin Simons 1992

--- PAGE 213 ---
Type 51, 
Dart15&17R
The British had been disappointed when the Skylark 2 
failed to win the International Standard Class design 
prize in 1956, but there was little doubt that the Ka 6 
designed by Rudolf Kaiser deserved the award. Since 
then, no serious attention had been paid at 
Kirbymoorside to the Standard Class. The prize was 
won in 1960 by the V-tailed Standard Austria and in 
1963 by the Finnish Vasama. A writer in the French 
magazine Aviasport suggested that the Ka 6 should 
really have won every time, but it had not been entered 
in the competition again after the first occasion.
According to Bill Slater, who soon afterwards 
became managing director at Slingsby, in 1963 the 
company faced a serious sales problem. The Skylark 4 
was in production at the rate of about one per week 
and Capstans and Swallows were being built, but few 
new orders were coming in. No significant improve­ 
ments could be envisaged for the Skylark series. It was 
therefore decided early in 1963 to tackle the problem 
of producing a Standard Class sailplane and to aim for 
the design award in 
1965, 
when the World 
Championships were to be held in England. The senior 
staff of the company were more enthusiastic about the 
new project than Slingsby, but following reconstruc­ 
tion of the board he was no longer in a controlling posi­ 
tion and about to retire, approaching 70 years of age.
Following the dissolution of the Shaw Slingsby Trust, 
the company was bought by Jack W. Bradley, whose 
chief interests were in building mass-produced houses. 
A fire in one of Bradley's York factories in 1964 had 
necessitated a reorganisation. The Kirbymoorside 
company was split into two, Slingsby Joinery Ltd and 
Slingsby Aircraft Ltd, with Bradley himself as chairman 
of both and of a holding company. New workshops were 
erected at Kirbymoorside to prefabricate window 
frames and other parts for houses. Glass-plastic tech­ 
nology was used to produce bathroom ware, including a 
magnificent two-seat bathtub advertised as the Gemini.
There could be no point in producing a machine that 
was not superior to the Ka 6, so it was decided to 
undertake considerable research before any of the 
main design features were settled. For the first time, so
far as anyone knew, computers were used to arrive at 
the best compromise. The necessary program was 
written and the calculations carried out at Cambridge 
University by Anthony Edwards, well known as a pilot 
and writer of statistical articles about cross-country 
soaring in Britain. Some additional computing capacity 
was called on from an Italian university. To achieve the 
performance to match the computed figures required 
the sailplane to have accurately built 'laminar flow' 
wing profiles and to come out close to the expected 
flying weight. Wind tunnel tests were carried out at 
Imperial College in London under the supervision of 
Frank Irving, also well known for his technical articles 
and his advisory position with the BGA. Once the basic 
aerodynamic configuration had been worked out, the 
engineering began and construction started on the 
Type 51 in May 1963.
The wing was very straightforward, and reverted to the 
usual two-piece design joining on the centreline. A rela­ 
tively high aspect ratio of 18 for the fixed 15m span was 
chosen and NACA '64 series' profiles were used. As indi­ 
cated by the second digit, a 40 per cent laminar boundary 
layer was aimed for. To prevent the wingtips being forced 
to operate at very small Reynolds numbers (narrow 
chords and low airspeeds), at which the performance of 
these low-drag aerofoil sections was thought to deterio­ 
rate, the taper ratio was small. The root of the wing was 
20 per cent of the chord thick to provide sufficient depth 
for the mainspar. A short distance outboard it was 
thinned to 18 per cent. The mainspar was of spruce, and 
to achieve the necessary strength it had to be twinned 
over about half the total span. It was heavy.
The use of gaboon ply was now abandoned. Except 
for a fabric covered area inboard of the ailerons, the 
wing was skinned with birch plywood. This was 
thicker than necessary for the loads it had to carry, but 
it was hoped it would retain a wave-free form to pre­ 
serve the low-drag contours. It was supported with 
ribs and auxiliary ribs ahead of the mainspar. To over­ 
come the difficulties of forming the skin around the 
leading edge, which had a fairly small nose radius, the 
method worked out for the Skylark series was used
21 1

--- PAGE 214 ---
Root section
NACA64618
o
Metal 
tailplane
Aileron hinge 
detail
Tip section
NACA643 615
CO
CM
Slingsby 
Type 51 
Dart 17 R
Drawn by Martin Simons 1993

--- PAGE 215 ---
TYPE 51, DART 15 & 1 7R
again. A light front spar provided gluing area for the ply 
to be laid in separate panels, top and bottom. An accu­ 
rately machined hollow leading-edge member was 
glued on to form an accurate entry for the profile. This 
structure was not particularly light.
Ailerons of small chord, plywood skinned, proved 
fully adequate and required no mass-balancing. The 
brakes, as required by the Standard Class specifica­ 
tion, were large enough to limit the airspeed in a dive to 
less than the safe maximum. The rigging system was 
similar to that of the T-45 Swallow, which in turn had 
been modelled on that of the old German Weihe. Each 
wing was attached to the fuselage with two pins in line, 
a large one at the mainspar and a smaller one at the 
leading edge. Then both wings could be raised together 
for the upper spar flanges to be united with a fifth, large 
pin. For wooden sailplanes this method of rigging has 
never been surpassed.
Much effort was put into reducing the cross-sec­ 
tional area of the fuselage. Designers everywhere had 
been much impressed by the Polish Foka which had 
been entered in the 1963 design contest. It did not win 
because it was considered too extreme, with the pilot 
supine in the cockpit and very limited visibility directly 
ahead. But by following this example to some extent 
and running all the controls along the sides of the fuse­ 
lage instead of beneath the seat, the fuselage height of 
the T-51 was reduced by about 10cm compared with 
the Skylark 4. Yet the reclined seating position was 
very comfortable, with an excellent view through an 
accurately moulded canopy.
The company's approach to new materials was still 
extremely cautious despite ten years' experience with 
GRP. Polyester resins were still used. The front fuse­ 
lage around the cockpit and the extreme nose were 
GRP, as was the central wing fairing, put in place after 
rigging. Otherwise the fuselage was orthodox, oval in 
cross-section and skinned with birch plywood. The 
landing wheel was fitted forward of the balance point 
so that the nose would not go down when the pilot 
climbed into the cockpit. A small nose skid was fitted 
to protect the fuselage when landing on rough ground. 
The vertical tail was stylishly raked back and faired 
carefully to the fuselage with large moulded GRP 
panels. The horizontal tail was of the all-moving type, 
but anti-balance tabs were fitted to ensure that the 
pilot should have some positive feel in the elevator. 
The all-moving tailplane was skinned with GRP ahead 
of the spar, with expanded polystyrene foam taking the 
place of ribs. This was the first time the company had 
used glass for a load-bearing component. Gussets and 
trailing-edge stiffeners were also made from GRP.
In general appearance, with its long rear fuselage 
and a small tail unit, the T-51, now christened Dart, was 
stylish and attractive. Its proportions were very differ­ 
ent from the Skylarks and there was much interest 
among likely customers. However, the prototype 
turned out to be quite a lot heavier than intended. 
Perhaps despite themselves the Slingsby team had pro­ 
duced a rather fast, heavily loaded sailplane which
could not be expected to scratch about and climb in 
weak thermals. The careful computer studies that pre­ 
ceded the detailed work were partly vitiated.
The first flight was made on 26 November 1963. 
There was no doubt in anyone's mind after these early 
tests that the Dart was exceptionally pleasant to fly. It 
was light on all the controls and very responsive 
without being unstable or tricky to handle. It had an 
excellent rate of roll, very helpful in centring thermals, 
and its performance at high speeds seemed impres­ 
sive. It would drop a wing and spin if clumsily handled, 
but this was true of many sailplanes. The company 
announced that it expected to produce a batch by 
March 1964, in time for several to be entered in the 
National Championships.
Four were indeed entered for the competitions held 
at Lasham in May. In one of the outstanding flights of 
the competition, John Williamson in the Dart reached 
Sunderland, 262km (162 miles) from his take-off, after 
a flight involving some very tricky scratching in weak 
lift to reach better weather further north, followed by 
some cloud flying. The one pilot who exceed this dis­ 
tance by a couple of kilometres, Brennig James, was in 
a Skylark 3 with 18m span, and he took nearly an hour 
longer to make the distance. Williamson reported cir­ 
cling at 45 or even 50kt, at least lOkt faster than the 
larger aircraft, but, providing thermals yielding climb 
rates better than 2 or 3kt could be found, the Dart left 
the others behind. The Darts were placed 2nd, 4th, 6th 
and 8th in the Standard Class, a mixed result and not 
what Slingsby had wished. It was especially annoying 
that the first and third places went to Ka 6CRs flown by 
pilots who had a good deal less competition flying 
experience than those who flew Darts.
Tests followed at Slingsby, and it was established 
that the low-speed performance was not as good as 
expected. Airflow separation around the wing roots 
was thought to be part of the cause. The 20 per cent 
locally thickened root section was perhaps to blame. 
After some hesitation the section was reduced to 18 
per cent like the rest of the wing. The wing roots were 
widened by adding an extension, producing an unusual 
re-entrant tapered planform but smoothing the flow 
over the roots and slightly increasing the total area.
A more significant change was the introduction of 
aluminium alloy reinforcement for the mainspar flanges, 
which reduced the weight by 20kg (441b) compared with 
the original spruce spar. This limited use of metal in what 
remained essentially a wooden structure was not 
entirely new, having been introduced in 1953 on the Orao 
designed by Boris Cijan and built in Yugoslavia. For the 
Dart the spar reinforcements, after machining to size, 
were sent away to have a veneer of wood bonded on to 
them by the Redux process and then returned to 
Kirbymoorside to be inserted in the wing jigs and glued 
up virtually as if they were wooden members.
With these changes it was considered that the Dart 
had almost achieved the performance expected of it. 
With the additional wing area and reduced weight the 
low-speed situation was acceptable. Nonetheless,
213

--- PAGE 216 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
work had already begun on a version with larger span. 
An early move in this direction was a 15m Dart convert­ 
ible to 17m by the addition of interchangeable extra- 
long tip sections. One was built in this form, but 
because the ailerons did not extend to the tips of the 
17m version there was some loss of roll rate.
The Dart 17 prototype first flew in November 1964. It 
was essentially a Dart 15 with the wings stretched to 17m. 
The rudder was subsequently enlarged to aid control of 
the extended wing in yaw. In April 1905 this aircraft was 
used by Nick Goodhart to win the Inter Senices 
Competition, 
in 
preparation 
for 
the 
World 
Championships. He was very pleased with it, praising 
especially the good cockpit, \isibility and handling. The 
performance of both the 15 and 17m versions in interna­ 
tional competition remained to be discovered. The World 
Championships took place at South Cerney in 1965, and 
the Slingsby team was delighted when the Dart 15 won 
the design prize. This had been the objective from the 
beginning. Might sales now equal those of the Ka 6?
The results of the soaring competition were less 
exciting. Only one Dart 15, flown by George Burton, 
was entered. The other British entry in Standard Class 
was the Olympia 4(55 from Slingsby's rival, Elliotts of 
Newbury. Burton was placed 5th, the first four places 
being taken by the French Edelweiss, the Swiss 
Standard Elfe and two Polish Foka 4s. As designs, none 
of these was considered suitable for general club use, 
so the Dait had done well, but a Ka 6CR was very close 
behind in sixth place. Also competing were the all- 
glass Phoebus from Germany and the all-metal HP \'2 
fromtheTSA.
What was more surprising at these competitions was 
that the Open Class was won outright by a Standard 
Class Foka 4 flown by Wroblewski, with Makula 4th in 
another Foka.. This probably said more about the 
Polish pilots' well practised techniques of team flying 
than their aircraft, but it did show that good 15m 
manoeuvreable sailplanes well flown could still 
compete with much larger and costlier machines. 
Second place in Open Class was taken by the most 
extraordinary aircraft of all, the D-36 Circe, which on 
paper was by far the best-performing sailplane in the 
world. It was entirely built of GRP, and because of its 
manifest flexibility was nicknamed gunimijliiycl 
(rubber wing) by the (lerman team. Three Akaflieg stu­ 
dents, Klaus Holighaus, Gerhard Waibel and Wolf 
Lemke, had designed and built it at Darmstadt 
Technical University.
The SHK, a 17m development of the Standard 
Austria, was placed third, and even those who believed 
the future might still lie with wooden aircraft found 
this aircraft more impressive than the Dart 17. The 
SHK had entered production at Schempp-Hirth in 
Germany during 1965 with new wing profiles devel­ 
oped by Richard Eppler at Stuttgart University. A radi­ 
cally different wooden structure with accurate 
surfaces enabled full advantage to be taken of these. It 
had a retracting wheel. It did not handle so well in the 
air, was less easy to rig and derig and was structurally
heavier, although it had the same maximum weight in 
flight and a lower wing loading. These disadvantages 
were not enough to offset the fact of its superior 
soaring and cross-country racing performance. Nick 
Goodhart came 7th in the Dart 17; a good result, but 
not what had been hoped for.
The exposed landing wheel created some additional 
drag in itself, and a fairing was added to the production 
aircraft, but there was a less obvious, more important 
penalty. In order to take-off and land safely with the 
wheel more than half-buried in the fuselage, the rigging 
angle of incidence of the wing had to be large to 
produce a reasonable angle of attack during the 
ground run. In the air this mattered very little at low 
airspeeds but during fast glides between thermals the 
wing operated at low angles of attack. This forced the 
fuselage into a distinctly nose-down attitude, across 
the general flow, and created a good deal of unwanted 
parasitic drag. Philip Wills took the 15/17m inter­ 
changeable-tips Dart to Texas and made some informal 
comparisons there with the Austria SH and the world- 
record-breaking all-metal Sisu. According to Wills, at 
inter-thermal airspeeds the Sisu fuselage was horizon­ 
tal, the SH fuselage slightly nose-down and the Dart 
markedly nose-down. The other aircraft left him far 
behind in strong conditions.
George Moffat, the most influential pilot and com­ 
mentator in th