s at Bramcote in June, a fine display of aerobatics 
including full spins and quick recoveries was put on by 
Martin Ream's demonstrator pilot in a very smart 
black and white Kite 2. This aircraft was made avail- 
able for flying by possible buyers, but the harm had 
been done. The two Kites entered in the contest placed 
nowhere, and no orders were placed. When the sub- 
contracting agreement between Hearn and Slingsby 
ended, eight unsold and unfinished Kite 2s were in 
storage. These went to Kirbymoorside, where Slingsby 
had three others. The total built was 11 including the 
crashed prototype. Slingsby was determined to sort 
out the spinning problem, finish and sell these aircraft 
if possible.
After reconsideration of the wing design and some 
experimental studies a modification was undertaken. 
Taking one of the sailplanes, the plywood was stripped 
off the tips from rib 22 outwards, and this part of the 
wing was twisted 5° in the washout direction before 
being reskinned with ply back to the aileron spar. The 
extreme wingtip was now rigged at 1° relative to the 
fuselage datum, a total washout of 7°. Initial test flights 
indicated that the misbehaviour at the stall had been 
cured. The aircraft went to EGA Test Group 1 in 1951 
for evaluation before the type was submitted for 
formal certification by the Air Registration Board, as 
required at that period. The BGA test programme, 
carried out mainly by Frank Irving and Lome Welch, 
was very thorough and demonstrated that the mod- 
ifications had been quite successful. The sailplane, 
though not without small faults, now handled in a satis- 
factory manner, and certification followed. All of the 
aircraft were modified to become Kites Mark 2A. They 
were offered with optional elevator trim tabs and 
enclosed cockpit canopies, and all were eventually 
sold and proved satisfactory in service with private 
owners. Handling was still not entirely satisfactory, but 
the type was not dangerous. The performance was 
quite good, and some owners believed their Kites to be 
about equal to the Olympia.
Most of the Kite 2s, however, ended in spinning acci- 
dents, and only three or four now survive. These have 
all, at some time, been fitted with blown bubble 
canopies. One of them, BGA 689, after a long history of 
repairs and even rebuilding, has been immaculately 
restored by Peter Warren and is in regular use. Another 
survivor, BGA 663, which was the Kite 2 tested by 
Irving and Welch after the modifications in 1951, was 
extensively modified further by Irving and his partners, 
who owned it afterwards. In Irving's words, the objec- 
tive was 'to stop the tendency to oscillate in yaw, to 
give it some decent airbrakes and to clean it up'. The 
most important changes are indicated in the accompa- 
nying drawing and photographs. This became the 
unique Kite 2B. Another Kite 2 was at some time fitted 
with a Skylark 2B vertical tail, presumably in another 
attempt to improve yawing stability. This was sold in 
recent times to the USA, where it remains.
If the outer wing panels had been better designed in 
the first place there would have been a market in the 
late 1940s for a robust club sailplane of this type. The 
Kite 2 was strong, uncomplicated and easily main- 
tained and repaired. It had a flying performance quite 
good enough for early cross-country flights, but after 
the Camphill accident the Olympia had the field virtu- 
ally to itself.
Type 26 Kite 2 data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a. 
Wing sections
Root
Station 8
Station 22
Tip
Incidence angles 
section chord lines
Root:
Station rib 8 
Station rib 22 
Station rib 27
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
15.2m
14.49m2 (156ft2)
15.52
7.22m (23ft 8Man)
NACA2412 
NACA2412 
NACA4412 
NACA0009 
relative to fuselage
Kite 2 
Kite 2A
8° 
8°
8° 
8°
4° 
4°
6° 
1°
190.5kg (4201b) 
281.2kg (6201b) 
19.53kg/m2 (41b/ft2)
datum and
137

--- PAGE 140 ---
Photographs of the unmodified Kite 2 prototype with open 
cockpit are rare. This is one of the few, taken from Slingsby's 
own archives. It shows the Kite 2 at the start of a winch 
launch. The skid at this stage was not faired and the cockpit
Apparently in an attempt to improve the airflow, a Kite 2 was 
fitted with tip bodies for experiments at Kirbymoorside.
was open. It is just possible to detect the change of wing 
section and wash-in at the wing-tips, causing a marked 
upward bend in the leading edge. (Slingsby collection)
Details are not known and the results were not reported. 
(Slingsby collection)
BGA 663 being given a winch launch at Lasham in 1951. The 
pilot is Ralph Hooper. The only hook provided was in the 
nose, the advantages of a rear hook mounting not having
been recognised at this time. The canopy is the original type, 
similar to that used on the Gull 4. (F. Irving)
138

--- PAGE 141 ---
Two photographs of the Kite 2A at Dunstable where it was 
owned and flown frequently by an enthusiastic private syn­ 
dicate.
The only example of the Kite 2B, BGA 663. at Dunstable 
during a vintage glider meeting. Note the modified rudder 
and increased fin area, the shortened skid and improved 
wheel fairing, and the wing root fairing. (M. Simons)

--- PAGE 142 ---
The instrument panel of Kite 2A BGA 689, Percy. From left to 
right the instruments are, airspeed indicator, turn-and-slip 
indicator, accelerometer (above), altimeter, Cobb-Slater 
pellet-type variometer and Cook electric variometer. The 
spoiler handle is just visible on the left, the tow release knob 
hangs below the instrument panel. The rudder pedals and 
control column are also visible. (P. Warren)
The Kite 2A named Percy, belonging to Peter Warren, fully 
restored to its original condition and paint scheme. Note the 
large wing angle of incidence relative to the ground. In flight, 
the Kite 2 always appeared nose-down. (P. Warren)
Peter Warren in the cockpit of Percy. ( P. Warren)

--- PAGE 143 ---
TYPE 26, KITE 2
Detail of Kite 2A Percy. (P. Warren)
Percy, a head-on view. (P. Warren)
A Kite 2Aon aero-tow at Lasham. (C. Brown)
141

--- PAGE 144 ---
Alternative 
rudder
Aileron gap 
detail
Transparent panels 
to illuminate 
instruments
DPS Type 
brakes
Root wing section 
Gottingen 535
Schempp Hirth 
type brakes
Enclosed 
canopy
Slingsby Type 30 
Prefect
Drawn by Martin Simons 1994

--- PAGE 145 ---
Type 30, Prefect
Slingsby's Type 27 project, abandoned before comple- 
tion, was for an unusual two-seater comprising twin 
Cadet fuselages joined by a central section of wing, 
with Tutor wing panels outboard. It was nicknamed 
the 'Widow' because of its supposed resemblance to 
the Northrop P-61 Black Widow nightfighter. The idea, 
which never caught on, was to give dual training in this 
aircraft so that on transferring to a single-seater the 
student pilot would find the cockpit and outlook 
almost identical.
The type number T-28 was applied originally to the 
redesigned T-21 which became the T-21B Sedbergh, 
and TVpe 29 was the Motor Tutor. Slingsby thus arrived 
at his sailplane type number 30, the Prefect.
The Prefect first flew in June 1948, and was adver- 
tised at a price of £425. It was an unpretentious design 
intended as a replacement for the Grunau Baby, which 
it resembled externally. The Grunau Baby was 
regarded as an intermediate type to come between the 
Tutor and a high-performance sailplane such as the 
Olympia or Gull 4, and this was the niche the Prefect 
was also expected to occupy. Like the Grunau Baby it 
would be suitable for the 5hr duration, 1,000m height 
gain and 50km cross-country tasks for the 'Silver C' 
badge. It was well understood that anyone who wished 
to progress to longer-distance flights and competitions 
would require something much better.
The T-30 was not without rivals. Elliotts of Newbury, 
whose Olympia had captured the British market for 
high-performance sailplanes, was now also producing 
a version of the Grunau Baby, the EON Baby, which 
threatened to dominate the 'intermediate' field. Nearly 
50 Elliott Babies were built, including some assembled 
by amateur constructors from kits. This seemed to 
leave little room for the new type from Kirbymoorside.
The Prefect was not merely a copy of the Grunau 
Baby. The general layout was similar, with only slightly 
increased span and the same basic wing profiles, 
Got 1 ingen 535 changing to a symmetrical section at the 
tips, with washout to prevent tip stalling. The only 
obvious external difference was the simplified wing 
plan, with straight taper over the outer panels instead
of the elliptical tips of the Baby. The flying weight was 
somewhat greater and the wing loading higher. 
However, a great deal of thought went into structural 
simplification and cost cutting without sacrificing per- 
formance and strength or increasing the weight. 
Wherever possible metal fittings, bearings and other 
small components were adapted from those used in 
the Cadet and Tutor. It was argued very reasonably that 
having standardised and interchangeable spare parts 
available from stock would be an important considera- 
tion for clubs operating and servicing these earlier 
types of Slingsby aircraft.
Instead of the usual stressed plywood skin torsion 
box ahead of a single mainspar, the Prefect wing had 
two spars with extensive internal cross-bracing, like 
the Tutor, but the leading-edge plywood skinning was 
counted as part of the primary structure, recognising 
its contribution to torsional stiffness. This allowed the 
twin struts of the Tutor to be replaced by a single strut 
on the Prefect. The strut itself was a length of stream- 
lined steel tubing of suitable size, sawn to length and 
given end fittings. The ailerons were simple, with a lon- 
gitudinal plywood box spar to resist torsional loads. 
The gap along the hinge line was closed with a 'half 
round' strip of wood and a fabric shroud.
On the early production models the airbrakes were 
of the old German DFS type. The blades lay flush with 
the wing surfaces in normal flight. To open, they 
pivoted around transverse axes, requiring quite a com- 
plicated drive mechanism with bellcranks and separ- 
ate bearings for each blade. The air pressure on the 
lower paddles moving down and back, tending to force 
them open, balanced the load on the upper blades as 
they moved up and forward against the airflow. After a 
few Prefects had been built the brakes were changed 
to the Schempp-Hirth type, which were simpler to 
install and opened like parallel rulers vertically above 
and below the wing. Although the designations are not 
entirely clear, it seems that the Prefect with Schempp- 
Hirth brakes was registered as the Type 30B.
The fuselage of the T-30 was also structurally quite 
different from that of the Baby and followed the
143

--- PAGE 146 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
pattern established by the T-21. Some notable weak- 
nesses of the Gnmau Baby design, especially the front 
skid attachment, were improved. Instead of ha\ing a 
stressed plywood skin, the fuselage behind the wing 
was a wooden space frame covered with fabric. The 
method of assembly was similar to that used for many 
model aircraft. The two identical fuselage sides were 
assembled with longerons and diagonal cross-braces, 
each joint being reinforced with plywood gussets or 
'biscuits' on both sides. The completed sides were then 
placed in a jig with the main cross-frames for the wing 
and tail supports and the cockpit. Cross-struts and the 
corresponding diagonal members to make a com- 
pletely triangulated frame were glued in top and 
bottom, forming a square-section box extending from 
the rear of the cockpit back to the sternpost, It was 
light, strong, easily built, and easily maintained and 
repaired. The upper part of the fuselage between wing 
and tail was merely a fairing with light vertical formers 
and a single longeron along the top. Plywood skinning 
was used on the front of the fuselage around the 
cockpit, on the main frames of the wing pylon, and 
underneath to reduce damage from small stones and 
rough ground.
The cockpit was normally fitted with a semi- 
enclosed canopy and windscreen, though like the 
Grunau Baby it was possible to fly the Prefect without 
any canopy at all. A fully enclosed cockpit cover was 
offered as an option. There was provision for a back- 
type parachute, though not many Prefect pilots ever 
bothered to carry one. The undercarriage consisted of 
a single wheel with a simple rubber sprung ash skid 
and a steel spring tailskid. The tailplane, with struts, 
was closely modelled on that of the Gmnau Baby, but 
the rudder was taken directly from the Kirby Cadet, 
using the same drawings.
Despite the competition from Newbury there was 
some demand for the Prefect, although sales were very 
slow at first. Slingsby adopted a policy which had 
proved successful before. In January 1949 he lent a 
Prefect to the London Gliding Club, still the largest in 
Britain, for a season. The loan gave anyone who 
wanted to assess the aircraft a chance to fly it, and to 
discuss it with people who had been operating and ser- 
vicing it regularly. Club members used the Prefect for 
their 'Silver C' badge. It made many 5hr duration flights 
over the hill at Dunstable, plenty of 1,000m ascents in 
thermals, and several cross-country excursions of 
50km or more. Before the end of the year it had 
become an indispensable member of the fleet, and in 
11)50 the club, ha\ing bought this aircraft, discovered it 
had accumulated more flying than any other club 
machine, 329hr, surpassing even the two-seaters.
Meanwhile, the Cambridge University Gliding Club 
had bought one, and a few others were sold elsewhere. 
One for the Royal Navy was fitted with instruments and 
a camera for more tests of aircraft-carrier wake air- 
flows following the loss at sea of the T-20, though these 
further experiments were never carried out. Gradually 
the Prefect established itself as a very safe, useful and
popular sailplane. A total of 30 were bought by Chilian 
dubs over the next few years, with exports to New 
Zealand, Israel, Egypt and Holland. Sixteen were 
bought for the ATC, where the type was known as the 
Prefect TX Mk.l. The eventual total of 46 built in the 
factory almost equalled the production of the EON 
Baby and, as with the Baby, a few were built from kits 
by amateurs.
As the Prefect became established, British gliding 
clubs were gradually being persuaded to abandon solo 
training with Daglings or Cadets. Dual instruction was 
becoming general. However, the old tradition was a 
long time a-dying.
In a school for powered flying the transition from 
dual to solo flying was, and is, simple. After a previous 
successful circuit, the instructor leaves the aircraft and 
waves the pupil off immediately to do the same thing 
again with the least possible fuss. Not so in gliding 
during the 1940s, '50s and even 60s. The glider pilot, 
who had been brought up to the required standard 
usually in a T-21B, was not then launched for the first 
solo in the familiar aircraft. The first-soloist was taken 
out of the two-seater and put into a single-seater. To 
the inevitable tensions associated with such an occa- 
sion wTere added all those strains associated with an 
unfamiliar cockpit, a different seating position, and 
different outlook, different control feel and response.
One reason for this was that flying the T-21B solo 
with its side-by-side seats required ballast to be carried 
to make up for the weight of the instructor. With only 
one seat occupied the e.g. would be much too far back 
for safety. The T-21B had provision for ballast, but 
fitting the necessary weights required the cockpit to be 
vacated and the aircraft to be taken off the launching 
line while someone delved into the nose with the 
appropriate lumps of lead, to clamp them down in the 
proper place and in the right quantity, allowing for the 
weight of the solitary pilot. The ATC Sedberghs were 
eventually adapted to carry trimming ballast in cylin- 
drical housings accessible from outside the cockpit, 
but this was almost unheard of in the civilian clubs. 
While all this business with ballast was going on, other 
pupils were impatiently waiting their turn to fly in the 
two-seater and the student preparing to go off alone 
had time to contemplate everything that might go 
wrong. Often enough the weather would change in the 
middle of the operation requiring at least a special 
briefing, more fuss and possibly even a postponement 
until another day. Another factor was economic. A 
typical gliding club possessed only one two-seater. If it 
was put out of action the entire training programme 
came to a standstill until it was flying again. If its T-21 
were badly damaged or written off, a small club might 
collapse. Club committees therefore were very reluc- 
tant to let the two-seater be used for first solos. It was 
accepted that the chances of damage to the precious 
aircraft were greater. The argument that no instructor 
should send a pupil off solo in any type of aircraft at all 
if there was a serious risk of accident found little 
support.
144

--- PAGE 147 ---
TYPE 3O, PREFECT
It seemed much easier, then, to have a suitable 
single-seat aircraft standing by, and the first-solo pilot 
would be given a thorough briefing before being sent 
off alone in it. In some clubs the first solo flights would 
be gentle 'low hops' in a Tutor, so that at least the pupil 
would have something of a feel for the aircraft before 
taking a launch to full height and doing a circuit. 
Sometimes the policy was even to go back to the old 
Dagling or one of the later types of primary glider and 
begin the process of solo training again almost from 
scratch. Progress to full circuit flying was then quick, 
but there was great frustration at being put on to such 
an aircraft after at least a taste of soaring in the T-21. 
Usually, when the trainee was judged ready to leave 
the T-21, the next flight was a full circuit from a winch 
launch in a totally different aircraft. There were not 
many serious accidents.
Although the Prefect was aerodynamically similar to 
the T-21B, the first-solo pilot had to adjust to consider- 
able changes. Some found the cockpit quite cramped 
and even claustrophobic after the very wide open 
arrangement of the two-seater, and a few exceptionally 
tall pilots could not get into it at all. The view in all 
directions was much better because the wing no longer 
obstructed vision overhead, and on the left there was 
no person to cut off the view on that side. The nervous 
pilot could find all this quite frightening. Paradoxically, 
to sit in a Prefect after training in a T-21, could make 
the pupil feel both tightly enclosed and unduly 
exposed. The instruments were invariably different 
and were often positioned differently on the panel. The 
familiar spoiler handle was replaced by an airbrake 
lever. All the controls felt strange even before taking 
off.
In flight, the mere fact that the Prefect was a smaller 
aircraft made it more responsive and lighter on all the 
controls than the T-21. A particularly noticeable differ- 
ence was the tendency of the Prefect to take up a very 
steep climbing attitude on winch launches, so that 
during the early stages of the climb it needed to be held 
down with a little forward elevator until sufficient 
height had been gained to enable safe recovery if the 
winch cable should break. All in all, the first-solo pilot 
needed a very careful briefing, but the Prefect was 
docile and well behaved even when handled roughly. 
Once the first few solos had been successfully accom- 
plished the Prefect was both pleasant and easy to fly. It 
soared well. Confidence built rapidly. Before long, the 
*C' soaring badge would be gained, and progression to 
more advanced flying could be quite rapid.
Training aircraft are not often allowed to make very 
long excursions from the home site, and club Prefects 
were used mostly for circuit and local soaring flights. 
Nevertheless, some notable achievements were made 
in the type. J. C. Riddell made a height gain of 3,090m 
(10,300ft) when cloud flying a Prefect over the Long 
Mynd in 1953. S. H. Georgeson first flew the Prefect at 
Dunstable in 1949 and did his 5hr in it there. He took 
one to New Zealand with him and described this 
Prefect, registered ZK-GAB, as ideal for making
exploratory flights over hitherto unknown soaring ter- 
ritory because it could be landed 'on a pocket handker- 
chief. With it, he twice broke the New Zealand national 
height record with flights in wave near Christchurch, 
the first to 3,180m (10,600ft) asl in December 1952, and 
the second, some months later, to 3,900m (13,000ft) 
asl, both without oxygen. He could have gone much 
higher if he had had the requisite apparatus on board. 
These were among the first substantial wave soaring 
flights in New Zealand, and had a considerable influ- 
ence on the subsequent development of soaring in that 
country.
Meanwhile, in England, as the old Tutor was phased 
out the Prefect became a standard first-solo aircraft 
and there were exports. The type became well-known 
in the Netherlands, where nine were in service. The 
prototype itself, which was originally registered G- 
ALLF in Britain, became PH-1 in Holland and later still 
returned again to Britain. Five went to Egypt, and 
Belgium, Israel and New Zealand took others.
At the time of writing a few Prefects remain in 
service. Most were written-off eventually after being 
seriously damaged in training accidents, and one was 
destroyed by fire at the Bristol Gliding Club's site in 
1973. Those that remain are cherished vintage 
sailplanes in the hands of private owners. Some of 
these have been modified in various small ways; G- 
ALLF for instance, flying with an enlarged rudder. At 
the Vintage Glider Club Rally at Terlet in Holland in 
1992, the strength and reliability of the Prefect was 
amply demonstrated when PH-192, built in the early 
1950s, gave a demonstration of aerobatics which 
amazed those who had, themselves, used the type for a 
few tentative circuits 40 years previously.
TVpe 30 Prefect data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Wing sections:
Root
Tip 
Length o.a.
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
13.72m (45ft) 
14.25m2 (154ft2) 
13.2
Gottingen 535
Symmetrical
6.49m(21ft3 1/2in)
176.9kg (3901b) 
279kg (6141b) 
19.5kg/m2 (41b/ft2)
145

--- PAGE 148 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
G-ALPC, the second Prefect built, is shown here at 
Dunstable in 1950. Note that the airbrakes were of the old 
DPS pattern. On later Prefects these were replaced by the 
vertical 'parallel-ruler' brakes of Schempp-Hirth type. In the 
left background is the wing of the two-seat Hawkridge 
Venture G-ALMF. (Slingsby collection)
Prefect G-ALLF in its modern guise and in perfect condition. 
Full registration letters were required for a short period 
during 1949-50, when Certificates of Airworthiness were 
issued by the Air Registration Board. The law was changed 
before long and registration letters disappeared from 
gliders. In this case the restorers decided to restore them as 
well. (Neville Churchet)

--- PAGE 149 ---
A Prefect at a vintage glider rally at Sutton Bank. A T-31 is 
being rigged in the background and beyond are the Scud 2 
and the Kirby Kite. (Ray Ash)
It was possible to fly the Prefect without the cockpit canopy 
and windscreen. For tall pilots this was sometimes the only 
way. (P. Selingei)
Prefect G-ALLF was built in 1948. It has had a long and 
varied history, having operated at Staverton, the Long Mynd 
and Dunstable, and has done well over 14,000hrs of flying. 
Numerous repairs were necessary over the years, and a
major restoration was done in the 1970s. The elevator is of a 
non-standard pattern, possibly taken from an old Grunau 
Baby, and the rudder was enlarged with a rounded top at 
some time. (Neville Churcher)
147

--- PAGE 150 ---
Prefects (including, in the background, G-ALLF in earlier 
guise) at Brienne le Chateau during the vintage glider rally of 
1978. (P. Selinger)
PI-1193, one of the Dutch Prefects, in flight. (P. Selinger)
The Prefect has always been popular in the Netherlands. 
PH193 and 192 are shown here at the 1978 Brienne rally. 
(M. Simons)
148

--- PAGE 151 ---
ZK-GAB was an early production Prefect exported to New 
Zealand, where, flown from Simons Hill by Dick Georgeson, 
it pioneered wave soaring in that country. (Slingsby 
collection)
A Prefect at Terlet in 1992. (M. Simons)
PH-192 in flight, with enclosed canopy. (M. Simons)
149

--- PAGE 152 ---
Root wing section 
Gottingen 426
T - 35 'Austral' 
Span 15.64 metres
Slingsby 
Type 31 & 35 
Tandem Tutor
(Cadet Mark 3)
Drawn by Martin Simons 1992 
\£/

--- PAGE 153 ---
Type 31 Tandem
Tutor (TX Mk 3
Cadet) and T-35
Austral
By 1950 it was at last recognised throughout the 
British gliding movement that the old solo method of 
primary training should be abandoned, and that two- 
seaters should be used. The main impediment for the 
small clubs was the greater capital cost of such other- 
wise excellent training aircraft as the T-21B Sedbergh 
which had been available since 1947. It was also felt in 
some quarters that a good two-seater should have the 
seats in tandem, so that the pupil would have the least 
possible adjustment to make on going solo. The 
advantage claimed for side-by-side seating was that 
the instructor could see and talk easily to the student, 
and vice versa. Some people maintained that too 
much conversation in the cockpit was undesirable 
because instructors talked too much anyway! The 
tandem arrangement allowed the instructor to speak 
when necessary but otherwise, after the first few 
flights, the pupil could learn to be self-reliant and get 
the feel of flying alone.
In 1948 Slingsby already had the main components 
of a new tandem-seated, inexpensive training glider. 
The original Type 8 Tutor single-seater had flown first 
in 1937, and subsequent minor redesign and strength- 
ening had established the Tutor or Cadet Mark 2 as a 
standard training sailplane suitable for first-solo 
flying. The Type 29 Motor Tutor, of which two had 
been built in 1948-49, used Tutor wings and tail unit 
with a new fuselage. In the Motor Tutor the pilot sat 
immediately underneath the wing, which was sup- 
ported on a simple cabane. The motor was mounted in 
front. The rear fuselage was a fabric covered wooden 
space frame of the style already well proved in the T- 
21.
It was a very simple exercise to redesign the fuselage 
of the Motor Tutor to take a pupil pilot instead of the 
engine. It would almost have been feasible to cut the 
cockpit off an existing Tutor and scarf it on to the 
Motor Tutor fuselage. However, to accommodate the 
instructor's feet on either side of the pupil's seat in 
front, the fuselage had to be widened slightly. The 
landing wheel and skid were taken directly from the 
Tutor. Many of the same jigs as for the Motor Tutor
were used, and the prototype T -31 flew in 1949. It was 
finished in silver dope and carried the 'B conditions' 
marking G-26-2 on either side of the rear fuselage. 
Apart from the new fuselage, the only other important 
change was the addition of half a degree of dihedral to 
the wing. The cockpits remained open, with small 
windscreens. At this stage no airbrakes or spoilers 
were fitted. The expected price was about 60 per cent 
of the cost of a T-21.
One group which had supported the idea of a tandem 
trainer was the Derbyshire and Lancashire Gliding 
Club, whose site at Camphill had been created from 
about a dozen small fields. The roots of dry stone walls 
were still extant under the turf all over the landing 
area, and caused many good landings to finish in a 
series of fairly heavy thumps. (Digging up wall roots 
was a favourite occupation in bad flying weather at this 
site until well into the 1960s.) The need for a very 
robust and easily repaired trainer was particularly 
obvious under these conditions, and it was therefore 
natural that the prototype T-31 should be tested and 
flown in service by this club. The first flight at Camphill 
was on 23 July 1949, when it flew about a dozen cir- 
cuits. Three days later the pupil (who had begun train- 
ing on primary gliders) was flying solo.
The test flights required for certification were done 
mostly by the Derby Club's chief instructor, Gerard O. 
Smith, at Camphill and other sites, with winch and 
aero-towed launches, and control and e.g. position 
checks. It was found that the T-31 handled well 
although it lacked any trim tab or spring trim for the 
elevator. If the student pilot was heavy enough to bring 
the e.g. to the forward limit, a constant pull of four 
pounds was required on the stick to hold the airspeed 
down to 40kt. The stalling speed at maximum all-up 
weight was measured at 33kt. A fully developed spin, 
even with the e.g. fully aft, was almost impossible, the 
maximum number of turns achieved being only one- 
and-a-half. The only minor abnormality was in side- 
slipping. The T-31 could hold a sideslip with the 
fuselage yawed 40° but with wings level and ailerons 
neutral.
151

--- PAGE 154 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
As expected, the performance of the sailplane was 
between those of the Slingsby Cadet and Tutor. The 
additional weight and drag of the instructor and the 
higher wing loading ensured that the T-31 would be 
less capable of soaring in weak upcurrents than the 
Tutor, but its greater wing span and aspect ratio gave it 
an advantage over the Cadet.
Certification having been completed, the T-31 
entered production. The prototype acquired the EGA 
number 667 in 1951 and became known as the T-31 A. 
Subsequent models, either in the factory or by retro- 
spective modification, had small spoilers well forward 
on the upper surface of the wing and became the T-31 B 
or Cadet TX Mk.3 in the ATC. For aero-towing a small 
additional strut was added to prevent rather alarming 
vibrations of the front lift strut under certain condi- 
tions of airspeed and loading. These struts had first 
appeared on the Motor Tutor.
The T-31 had the same type of mainspar design as the 
original Tutor. The ribs were threaded on to the spars 
to be glued in their places, after which strips of spruce 
were added above and below the spar flanges between 
the ribs to provide gluing area for the plywood nose 
skin. After long service these were found to cause 
compression shakes in the spars, so retrospective 
modifications were required.
The T-31B was greeted with enthusiasm by the ATC, 
and 131 Cadets TX Mk.3 were built under Air Ministry 
contract. Painted in the official para-military colour 
scheme with roundels and the bold lettering AIR 
CADETS on either side of the front fuselage, the 
Cadet Mk.3 became a great favourite 1 with the many 
youngsters who had their first flying experience in 
one of these gliders. The main purpose of the cadet 
training scheme was to bring students up to solo stan- 
dard, and there was little emphasis on gaining certif- 
icates for soaring. Many of the cadets finished when 
they had reached the B certificate stage, which 
required only a few gliding flights from a winch 
launch. It is recorded that one of the Cadet Mk.3 
gliders made oxer 120,000 flights of about 3min each, 
a total of 6,000hr. This may not have been typical, but 
it does indicate the very hard use to which the ATC 
gliders and instructors became accustomed. In fairly 
recent times the survhing Cadets Mk.3 no longer 
required by the ATC 1 have been sold, and some are 
again in service in Chilian hands in Britain and over- 
seas, following restoration.
Civilian clubs in Britain, with a few exceptions, were 
not greatly enthusiastic about the T -31 despite its rela- 
tively low cost. With the emphasis increasingly on 
cross-country flying, most clubs felt it was essential for 
the beginner to be introduced as soon as possible to 
thermal soaring and although the T-31 and the Tutor, its 
single-scat equivalent, were capable of exploiting ther- 
mals when skilfully handled, the T-21 was much better 
for this. Sales of the T-31 on the civilian home market 
were relatively few. Many of those which appeared 
briefly on the BGA register were exported, and it 
appeals that only about a dozen of those built at
Kirbymoorside were ever in regular use in British 
gliding clubs, although several more were taken up by 
the RAF Gliding and Soaring Association, and one or 
two at least by the Royal Naval Gliding and Soaring 
Association. Of the 69 civilian aircraft produced in the 
factory, the great majority were exported to such coun- 
tries as Pakistan, Burma, Jordan, Lebanon, Nyasaland, 
Israel, Ceylon and Australia. A batch of six kits was 
sent for assembly in New Zealand, and two went to 
Australia. Others were built from kits in Britain and 
elsewhere, and some were assembled from govern- 
ment surplus and spares.
Designed from the outset as a trainer, the T-31 was 
never expected to make long cross-country flights or 
achieve great heights, but there were some fine 
achievements. 
At 
the 
Australian 
National 
Championships in 1956 the Royal Australian Navy's T- 
31, which had been fitted with an enclosure for the 
cockpits, made a cross-country flight of 93km (58 
miles). In New Zealand the Canterbury Gliding Club's 
T-31 broke the national altitude record with a wave 
flight over 5,700m (19,000ft) and made many other 
ascents above 3,000m (10,000ft).
The total of all T-31s ever flown is certainly in excess 
of 200, and probably about equal to the number of T- 
21s.
An interesting variant of the T-31 was the T-35, 
known 
as 
the 
Austral. 
This 
was 
built 
at 
Kirbymoorside to a special order for an Australian 
gliding club. The wingspan was increased to 15.64m 
(51.3ft) by the addition of extra rib bays on each side, 
extending the tips, and the rudder was enlarged to 
assist control of the longer wing in yaw. The result 
was a worthwhile improvement in soaring per- 
formance, and after arrival in Australia the T-35 made 
a useful contribution to the development of soaring 
training in that country, flying with various clubs 
including those at Waikerie and Renmark in South 
Australia, and with the RAAF Club at Laverton. It 
appeared as No. 24 on the Gliding Federation of 
Australia register. Home-built enclosed canopies for 
both cockpits were fitted at an early stage in its 
career. The airframe still exists complete in storage at 
Tocumwal in New South Wales.
TVpe 31 data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Wing sections:
Root
Tip 
Length o.a.
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
13.2m (43.3ft) 
15.8m2 (170ft2) 
11
Gottingen 426 
Symmetrical 
7.1m (23.3ft)
176kg(3881b) 
376kg (8291b) 
23.8kg/m2 (4.881b/ft2 )
152

--- PAGE 155 ---
TYPE 31 & 35, TANDEM TUTOR
The original T-31 with the B conditions marking G