320' 320' 336 ' 336 ' 334 ' 334 ' 334 ' 334 ' 334 ' 334' 334' 390 ' 310
Wing root section 
Modified Gottingen 652
Wing section at mid span 
Modified Gottingen 535
Alternative tail unit 
(EGA 651)
Prototype
cockpit canopy
(BGA 382)
Slingsby
Type 13
Wing tip
section
Clark YH
Petrel
Drawn by Martin Simons 1991

--- PAGE 87 ---
Type 13, Petre
One of the first people to fly Slingsby's Type 12 Kirby 
Gull in 1938 was Frank Charles, the speedway cham- 
pion, who had surprised the gliding movement a few 
years earlier by teaching himself to fly his Kirby Kite. 
What Charles thought of the Gull was not recorded, but 
he did not order one. Instead, he asked Slingsby to 
build him a modernised version of the Rhonadler, a 
sailplane produced by the German firm of Alexander 
Schleicher. Designed by Hans Jacobs, the Rhonadler 
was the first high-performance sailplane ever to be 
mass-produced in a factory. The prototype made its 
first competition flights at the Wasserkuppe in 1932, 
with Peter Riedel as the pilot. The Rhonadler was 
smaller than the very special advanced sailplanes 
custom-built for the few ace pilots. It was light, easy to 
handle in the air and on the ground, and relatively inex- 
pensive, being designed from the outset for easy pro- 
duction. It soon became very popular, but by 1938 it 
was regarded by the more experienced pilots as out- 
moded.
The Rhonadler embodied the lessons learned from 
the previous generation of sailplanes, which were 
designed mainly for slope soaring. It was known that 
thermals existed, but not many pilots in 1932 under- 
stood how they should be used. The need for 
manoeuvrability, to turn tightly in small areas of upcur- 
rent, was accepted. The desirability of flying at high 
speeds when penetrating sinking air on cross-country 
flights was just beginning to be appreciated, but it was 
still thought that a very light wing loading and minimal 
rate of sink were essential.
The Rhonadler had a strongly tapered cantilever 
wing with an unusually deep root, allowing a very light 
mainspar to be used. Plywood stressed skin covered 
the leading edge to the mainspar, with fabric behind. 
Long, narrow ailerons extended over more than half 
the semi-span. The aerofoil section at the wing root 
seems to have been a special design by Hans Jacobs 
himself. It was based on the extraordinary Gottingen 
652, a very thick teardrop shape with extremely pro- 
nounced camber. This profile had been used success- 
fully on the famous Fafnir sailplane, and in England on
the little Scud 2. For the Rhonadler Jacobs reduced the 
camber but the basic thickness form was retained. At 
the mid semi-span the section blended into the familiar 
Gottingen 535 used on the Grunau Baby and then to a 
thin reflexed tip, probably the Clark YH. Very pro- 
nounced washout was incorporated to preserve lateral 
control near the stall.
The fuselage, a semi-monocoque structure of a style 
that was becoming normal, was round backed with 
pointed keel, and the wing was mounted on a low 
pylon. The usual type of skid undercarriage was fitted. 
The earliest Rhonadlers had cockpit canopies of wood 
with small portholes cut to provide the pilot with a 
restricted view. Before long the factory was fitting 
simple transparent enclosures. An all-moving tailplane 
and an aerodynamically balanced rudder were used; 
very orthodox for the period.
In 1934 a Rhonadler was imported into Britain and, 
flown by Eric Collins, earned a great reputation. It 
handled well, and Collins demonstrated that it could 
soar in a wide variety of conditions. After Collins's 
death (performing aerobatics in a Grunau Baby for 
Cobham's National Aviation Day displays), his 
Rhonadler was taken over by a private syndicate and 
continued to make impressive cross-country flights in 
England. There was really not much competition for it 
until the arrival, from Germany, of Jacobs's later 
design, the Rhonsperber, and the Schempp-Hirth 
Minimoa.
Frank Charles apparently could see no advantage in 
these newer types or in Slingsby's products, the King 
Kite and Gull, and believed that an improved 
Rhonadler would suit him best. Slingsby, for whom 
definite orders backed by adequate cash were always 
vitally important, was in no mood to disagree. Work on 
his new two-seater design, the Gull 2, was shelved in 
order to produce the Type 13. Charles himself gave it 
the name Petrel.
Slingsby described the Petrel as 'merely a gull 
winged version of the Rhonadler', and so it was. The 
same wing was used except for the gull dihedral. This 
brought the centre section down to fair directly to the
85

--- PAGE 88 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
fuselage without any pylon. Spoilers were fitted. The 
fuselage was redesigned with a smoother, more gener- 
ous line ahead of the wing allowing for a contoured 
canopy similar to that of the Gull. The cockpit was 
more comfortable than the German type, with room 
for the shoulders. The tail unit and almost everything 
else was transferred as directly as possible from the 
Rhonadler. (Drawings for the Rhonadler '32 were 
found in the Slingsby archives.)
Harking back even further into the past, Frank 
Charles required Slingsby to give him a wooden 
cockpit canopy with only two elliptical portholes, one 
on each side, to allow him to look out. Cockpit 
canopies at this time were usually built-up, transparent 
panels set in a wooden framework, but Charles evi- 
dently preferred to have direct access to the air, even at 
the cost of restricted vision. He may have felt that the 
inescapable small irregularities of the panelled canopy 
created more drag than a smooth wooden structure 
with portholes.
The first flight took place in December 1938. Details 
of the new sailplane were published in January 1939, 
when it was stated that Charles had already taken 
delivery, but he did not fly the aircraft until 19 February 
at his club's site near Banow-in-Furness, a good local 
soaring flight and a short cross-country being made on 
this day. Crude calculations suggested that the Petrel 
had 
a minimum sinking speed 
of 0.33m/sec 
(1.08ft/sec). Charles reported that it stalled at 46kmh 
(28mph) and showed no signs of dropping a wing at 
low speeds. He dived it to 128kmh (79mph) with no ill 
effects. One who observed it remarked that the Petrel 
was very like the Rhonadler when seen from below, 
which should have been no surprise. Because of the 
slightly tidier wing root and fuselage junction the 
Petrel might have been a little superior to the 
Rhonadler, but the difference cannot possibly have 
been very great, Charles flew the Petrel again a few 
days later at Sutton Bank, where it excited much 
admiration, and he made some more cross-country 
flights in March and April.
Presumably feeling that the numerous jigs made for 
the Type 13 should not be allowed to stand idle, 
Slingsby decided that it should go into production, but 
with a more orthodox cockpit canopy. A fixed tailplane 
instead of the 'pendulum' elevator could be ordered if 
preferred. In advertisements the Petrel was described 
as The latest development in high performance 
sailplane design, with a large speed range, low sinking 
speed and remarkable gliding angle'. Slingsby asked P. 
M. Watt to fly the second Petrel in the BGA competi- 
tions due to take place in July at Camphill, Derbyshire. 
New advertisements read: 'Two machines of this type 
will be competing with German sailplanes of the same 
class. These two machines are the first of a batch of 
eight now on order for various parts of the Empire.' 
The third, which had the fixed tailplane, was ordered 
by members of the \ewcastle-upon-Tyne Soaring 
Syndicate, but was evidently not ready in time for the 
contest.
Watt flew well in the contest, completing several 
good cross-country flights including one by a very 
roundabout route via Nottingham and Boston to 
Skegness on the coast, using the sea breeze conver- 
gence to get him over the last 20km (12 miles). He 
arrived to discover Stephenson's cross-channel Blue 
Gull on the ground there already. In the final tally of 
scores Watt placed fifth, but any sense of satisfaction, 
even for the winners, was overwhelmed by sadness. 
There had been a fatal accident earlier in the week, the 
first ever at Camphill, when W. E. Godson spun into the 
hill in his Kestrel, a small sailplane designed by Bill 
Manuel which Godson had built from plans.
The Camphill flying ground is about 390m (1,300ft) 
above sea level. On the final Saturday there was a 
damp, overcast sky with a southerly wind, and the 
clouds were only a few hundred feet above the take-off 
point. Frank Charles in his Petrel was launched by 
winch in a rain shower. Towards the top of the climb 
the Petrel entered the cloud and vanished. The winch 
driver cut the power, expecting Charles to release the 
cable. When the Petrel emerged from the overcast it 
was heading downwind, as if to complete a normal 
circuit and landing, but the winch cable was still on, 
sagging in a loop. At about 60m (200ft) the slack ran 
out and the cable tightened, bringing the Petrel to a 
halt in the air and pulling it vertically into the ground. 
Charles was killed.
No completely satisfactory explanation was ever 
forthcoming. Why Charles did not release the cable 
when he felt the power fail is not known. The tow cou- 
pling was found to be in good working order. He may 
have assumed that the cable had broken. The winch 
driver was provided with an axe (there was no built-in 
guillotine), but it was said he could not see that the 
cable was attached to the sailplane because of the rain. 
In any case, he had very little time to get out of the 
driving seat and race round to the chopping block. 
There was even talk of a loose dog getting in the way. 
The wreckage of the sailplane was carried off the field. 
The author as a child saw this accident, and remem- 
bers the sailplane passing along the western side of the 
field with the cable dangling, and then its fall and total 
collapse, apparently into a heap of tiny pieces, on the 
airfield. I also remember later looking at the broken 
remnants of the wings, the varnish still glistening as 
they lay against a dry stone wall behind the hangar. 
Flying continued.
It was not the first time an accident had been caused 
by failure to release from a winch tow. The axe was 
provided to allow the cable to be chopped if the release 
jammed, which was not a very rare thing. After cutting, 
a sailplane with several hundred feet of loose steel 
cable dangling below could still be brought down 
sharply if the wire caught on some obstruction, and at 
least one pilot had lost both feet in an accident from 
this cause. The accident to the Petrel brought matters 
to a head. Letters in Sailplane and Glider suggested 
possible precautions, including the use of weak links 
in the cable so that it would snap under any unusual
86

--- PAGE 89 ---
TYPE 13, PETREL
strain. This eventually became standard practice4. A 
design for a simple type of automatic release was pub- 
lished, and though it was not adopted it was certainly 
on the right lines. The outcome before long was the 
invention by John Furlong and Leonard Ottley of the 
Ottfur release. This device, if properly used with two 
rings of correct size on the end of the cable, let go 
immediately if the angle of the line relative to the air- 
craft approached too nearly to the vertical. If Frank 
Charles's Petrel had been equipped in this way, the 
release would have operated automatically as soon as 
the winch stopped. From 1944, when large production 
orders for gliders for the ATC were issued, no sailplane 
in Britain was built without an Ott fur hook.
Yet old sailplanes were still permitted to fly with old 
types of release for several years more. Furlong wrote 
as late as June 1948 to warn of the dangers of these, or 
of burying the release inside a tunnel where the rings 
could stick. Rings which could jam in the release were 
used sometimes. There was danger in relying on a 
mechanical guillotine on the winch which might 
become rusted and ineffective through lack of use. The 
old axe, Furlong said, was still the most reliable cable- 
chopper. It was not very unusual, even at this time, to 
see a sailplane trailing cable over trees, fences, parked 
vehicles and even people in order to make a landing 
after a cable break or chop. Safety releases equivalent 
to the original Ottfur are now mandatory on all motor- 
less aircraft.
Within a very few weeks after this, sport flying in 
Britain ended for the duration of the Second World 
War. Slingsby never completed any more Petrels after 
the third, and customers around the Empire, men- 
tioned in his advertisements, waited in vain. Most 
sailplanes were impressed for various kinds of military 
uses. In the case of the Petrel, John Neilan gave an 
account of how he flew one over some unspecified part 
of northern England for a few happy days during 1940. 
It was an exercise for anti-aircraft gun crews and the 
Royal Observer Corps in a part of the country where 
they were not getting much practice, even during the 
Battle of Britain. The idea was to take a tow behind a 
Gipsy Moth, to 3,000m (10,000ft) some distance away 
from base and then glide back by a circuitous route, 
Neilan taking note of heights and distance while the 
gun crews and observers on the ground attempted to 
keep track and estimate ranges and altitudes. It is 
probably no surprise that the officer who thought of 
this was himself a pre-war gliding enthusiast. The lack 
of any engine noise prevented alarm among the public 
and compelled the ground observers to scan the skies 
in all directions most assiduously. Perhaps acciden- 
tally, or perhaps not, the tow rope sometimes broke 
and Neilan was obliged to proceed by soaring. He 
praised the Petrel warmly.
In late 1944 and on into 1945 Slingsby was advertis- 
ing the Petrel 2, a development which would have 
become his Type 22. The new Petrel was to have had a 
landing wheel, and the canopy would have been rede- 
signed with a simple stepped shape with windscreen,
instead of the original fully contoured nose. A fixed 
tailplane would have been standard. It was described 
as 4A high performance sailplane most suitable for 
British conditions', but there was no concealing the 
fact that the Petrel 2 had a Rhonadler wing, unchanged 
in any important respect. The basic design dated back 
to 1932. The Petrel 2 would have been no advance aero- 
dynamically on the pre-war- Petrels, which had in any 
case been only marginally better than the original Hans 
Jacobs design. With the prospect of several much more 
advanced types about to come on to the market, no 
interest was shown by customers. Construction of the 
Petrel 2 was never1 even started.
The second and third Petrels both came through the 
war and still survive. They have done much more flying 
since 1945 than they ever 1 did before, and are to be seen 
from time to time at vintage glider rallies. They are 
graceful, safe, easy to fly, can soar in the feeblest of lift 
and will float gently around all afternoon on almost any 
sunny day. But if the pilot wishes to fly across-country, 
they seem very slow.
Petrel data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Wing sections: 
Gottingen 
Mid span 
Tip 
Lengtho.a.
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
17.3m (56ft Urn) 
16.72m2 (180ft2) 
17.9
652 modified 
Gottingen 535 
Clark YH 
7.24m(23ft9in)
199.5kg (4381b) 
289.5kg (6401b) 
17.3kg/m2 (3.541b/ft2)
Performance
Best glide ratio (estimate) 1:27
The cockpit canopy with port-holes of the prototype Petrel, 
as ordered by Frank Charles (Slingsby collection)
87

--- PAGE 90 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
A post-war photograph of Slingsby Petrel BGA 418 in flight. 
(C. Brown)
A characteristic view of the Petrel on approach to landing. 
The very thick wing root and pronounced taper, with the gull 
wing, give it a highly distinctive appearance. (M. Simons)
. JL fe

--- PAGE 91 ---
Possibly the last photograph of Charles in the cockpit before 
his fatal accident in the Petrel. (Wills collection)
The instrument panel of BGA 418. The knob on the left is the 
tow release. (M. Simons)

--- PAGE 92 ---
BGA 651 for a few years was restored partly to its original 
clear-doped and varnished finish. It is seen here at a vintage 
rally at Sutton Bank. It has since been repainted. 
(M. Simons)
The instrument panel of BGA 651. The tuft of wool on the 
pitot tube is the most sensitive slip indicator available, and 
the cheapest. (M. Simons)
A Petrel being rigged at the Long Mynd in 1978. The wing 
section at the root is clearly shown. It was taken directly from 
the Rhonadler, and is a greatly modified form of the 
Gottingen 652. This is the aircraft flown by Watt in 1939. 
(M. Simons)

--- PAGE 93 ---
The only Petrel built with a fixed tailplane, BGA 651 flew in 
Eire for many years and was retired to a museum. It was 
returned in 1973 to England. The wheeled dolly is dropped 
after take-off. (M. Russell)
The contest number 19 and the transparent canopy identify 
this Petrel as that flown by P .M. Watt, taking a winch launch 
at the 1939 National Competitions. (A. E. Slatei)

--- PAGE 94 ---
|viv|
I 
~r i \j i \j \ *j i \j\j\j I
J-450 J-450-K450 J-45CH
k 450-1-450-I-450-1
Slingsby
Type 14
Gu\\2
Drawn by Martin Simons 1992

--- PAGE 95 ---
Type 14, Gull 2
The Type 14 Gull 2 was unlucky in the hour of its birth. 
Fred Slingsby began on this large high-performance 
two-seater in 1938, but shelved it temporarily to work 
on the Petrel. Sailplane and Glider carried a general- 
arrangement drawing and a brief description of the 
projected aircraft in January 1939. It was expected to 
be ready for test flying in April, but Slingsby was short 
of staff. In July the Gull 2 was again advertised as 
nearing completion, but was not actually ready for test 
flying until October, by which time Britain was at war.
It was by far the largest and most complex aircraft 
Slingsby had undertaken, and it was expensive, repre- 
senting a large investment for his small company. What 
prompted him to produce it is not clear. With the British 
gliding movement still relatively small and the demand 
for advanced cross-country two-seaters limited, he 
cannot have expected many sales. According to state- 
ments published years later, Slingsby recognised the 
need for students to be trained in cross-country 
soaring, to increase the number of 'Silver C' pilots in 
Britain. In the long run this would have increased the 
market for all of his aircraft. If he thought like this in 
1938 he was well ahead of the British gliding clubs, 
among whom such ideas had hardly begun to dawn. 
Probably he hoped to satisfy a few relatively wealthy 
private customers, one or two of whom might have 
been interested in such an aircraft. He would also have 
had an eye open for the export market.
To assist with design work, stressing and drawing he 
employed Thoby Fisher, now a well qualified young 
engineer. Even with this help, much of the construc- 
tion was done in advance of drawings. Using the 
general-arrangement and basic layout plans, full-scale 
lofting was carried out on the shop floor, the results 
being transferred to paper later. The Gull was unusual 
in having the seats arranged side-by-side. This 
increased the frontal area of the fuselage compared 
with contemporary two-seaters such as the German 
Kranich but Slingsby, with the experience of his Falcon 
3 behind him, believed that many pilots preferred this 
arrangement. The performance would not suffer much 
because the general aerodynamic- shape was good.
The alternative of tandem seats led to various diffi- 
culties. The Kranich, for example, placed the second 
pilot behind the mainspar with his head emerging 
between the wings. He was surrounded by structure, 
able to see upwards but not forward or downwards 
except through very inadequate transparent panels in 
the wing root, nor even directly sideways because the 
gull dihedral cut off most of the view in that direction. 
Other designs had placed the second pilot entirely 
under the wing, which gave excellent view down- 
wards, but not forwards or upwards and sideways into 
the direction of a banked turn in a thermal. The solu- 
tion of a forward-swept wing had been adopted for the 
magnificent Kim-3 Stakhanovetz which set world 
records in the USSR, but this raised structural prob- 
lems and would have required some unfamiliar stress- 
ing 
and 
stiffness 
calculations. 
A 
side-by-side 
arrangement simplified every aspect of design and 
construction. The only disadvantage, apart from the 
small drag penalty, was that if the aircraft was ever 
flown solo it would require ballast to compensate for 
the absent pilot, to bring the e.g. within safe limits. 
Slingsby was not the first designer to adopt this seating 
arrangement, but there were only one or two prece- 
dents in the high-performance class of sailplane.
The Original Gull 2 sketches showed a wingspan of 
18.3m (60ft). As work progressed the weight and wing 
loading estimates were revised. The span was 
extended to nearly 20m (GS/^ft), with an aspect ratio 
over 18. A tapered planform was adopted, with a very 
slight change of taper on the leading edge outboard of 
the gull dihedral bend. The wing sections, from the 
NACA four-digit series, were almost the same as those 
on the Kirby Gull single-seater, but at the extreme root 
the 21 per cent thick 4421 was used to give plenty of 
spar depth. Washout and a progressive change of aero- 
foil section to RAF. 34 at the tips was expected to 
ensure adequate lateral control at low speeds and 
prevent dangerous wing dropping at the stall. To 
prevent negative angles of attack over the outer panels 
at high speeds, the washout angle was kept to the 
minimum necessary.
93

--- PAGE 96 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
The Gull 2 was stressed for a normal load factor of 
8</ mid inverted 6</. The stalling speed was about 
56kmh (35mph), and the estimated best glide ratio was 
1:2^.5, which was probably optimistic. Nevertheless, 
the performance would have been extremely good by 
the standards of the day. With the higher aspect ratio 
and up-to-date wing profiles the Gull 2 must have been 
superior, in terms of sheer gliding performance, to the 
successful Kranich which dated back to 1935. There 
had certainly never been anything as good available in 
Britain.
To rig and de-rig such a large aircraft and to carry it 
by road on a trailer made it necessary to construct the 
wing in more than two segments. Slingsby decided on 
three, a centre section and two outer panels. The three 
components of the wing were of fairly similar weights, 
the centre section weighing 196kg (43lib) and the 
outer panels 176kg (3871b) each. This made it feasible 
for a relatively small ground crew to assemble or de-rig 
the Gull 2. Even so, without special equipment five 
able-bodied persons were necessary. The rudder could 
easily be removed for transport, so the trailer to carry 
the Gull 2 needed to be very little longer than the outer 
wing sections, 7m (23ft).
The mainspar of the centre section was continuous 
across the fuselage, the flanges being laminated in 
spruce and incorporating the gull dihedral form. A 
diagonal sub-spar was used to transfer the torsional 
loads from the plywood covered 'D' wing nose to the 
rear root connection. The plywood stressed skin of the 
leading edges of the whole wing ahead of the mainspar 
was laid with the grain diagonal, increasing its tor- 
sional resistance. Behind the mainspar, as usual, the 
wing was covered with fabric. In the original 
schematic sketch of 1938 only flaps were shown. These 
were intended not only for landing but to aid turning 
tight circles in thermals. It was soon, very sensibly, 
decided to include spoilers on the upper surface as 
well. The flaps were confined to the inboard panels, 
clear of the bend in the wing, and the spoilers too were 
built into the centre section. The fuselage was hung on 
to this very strong unit with four plain steel pins locked 
with wire. Much weight and cost was saved by obvi- 
ating the need for massive metal fittings to accommo- 
date the powerful bending loads in the middle. The 
ailerons, with diagonal bracing, extended over most of 
the outer wing, carried on an auxiliary spar which, 
inboard, connected with the flap supporting spar.
The fuselage was of standard semi-monocoque type. 
The cross-section changed progressively from a nearly 
circular form at the front to a pear or heart shape with 
a pointed keel at the rear. There were two large and 
comfortable seats under a large panelled Plexiglas 
canopy which had butterfly-type doors, and a large 
landing wheel, essential on a sailplane of this size and 
weight, with a skid forward. \\Tien fully rigged, a large 
built-up plywood fairing covered the junction of wing 
to fuselage. The tail unit was orthodox but the tailplane 
was mounted high on a sub-fin. This provided addi- 
tional area clear of any blanketing effects to help spin
recovery, and also kept the tail clear of the ground 
when landing in rough fields.
Completed at last, the Gull 2 was ready for flight, but 
all Chilian sport flying was now banned. It was not 
allowed to take-off, even for testing, until in April 1940 
two brief circuits were permitted, after which it was 
immediately grounded again by official decree. A very 
brief film clip exists, in colour, showing Slingsby with 
several helpers moving the pristine new aircraft out of 
a hangar, probably at Welburn, and trying out the 
cockpit seating. It was at this time finished in the usual 
clear dope and varnish. This film might have been 
made on the occasion of the first, all too brief, flights.
Eventually the Gull 2 was requisitioned for the ATC, 
ostensibly to be employed for demonstrations and 
publicity. It was not considered suitable for use as a 
basic trainer. It is not clear how much flying it did 
during the next few years, but at least it was not 
smashed or allowed to deteriorate too much, as many 
other requisitioned aircraft were. In May 1945 a rather 
bitter comment, accompanying a description of the 
sailplane, appeared in Sailplane and Glide)'. 'Tucked 
away in a hangar somewhere in the North,' the article 
began, 'sits a high performance sailplane gathering 
dust but otherwise well-preserved.' The writer, who 
may have been Slingsby himself, ended: 'Last year the 
designer was given permission to make two soaring 
flights at Sutton Bank, but further test flights were not 
permitted and, apart from showing its excellent 
soaring qualities, speed range, and low sinking speed 
on the two flights at Sutton Bank, we are denied the 
valuable data which can only be obtained from flight 
tests by a qualified test pilot.'
The Gull 2 made another brief appearance, but did 
not compete, in the first post-war British National 
Championships, held at Bramcote Naval Air Station in 
1947. Sailplane and Glider, reporting the meeting, 
described it and another ATC 1 aircraft, a Falcon 3, as 
'battle scarred', though the Gull 2, still clear varnished, 
appeared to be fully airworthy. (The Falcon did not 
remain airworthy long; it was broken on the airfield on 
the same day.)
At about this time there was a half-formed plan to 
take the Gull 2 to Australia to break world records over 
the vast plains there. How serious this project was 
when it was first mooted, and when it was expected to 
happen, is hard to establish. Philip Wills had close 
family and company connections with Adelaide in 
South Australia. He knew the country. It is just possible 
that this venture was in mind as early as 1938, and if so 
it may have been one of the factors in Slingsby's deci- 
sion to produce this two-seater. Nothing came of it 
post-war because the Gull 2 was not made available. 
Despite protests it remained in ATC hands until 1951 
when, at last, it was released and allocated a BGA 
registration. After an overhaul in the Slingsby factory 
the Gull was painted silver overall.
Serious test flying began in 1952, the pilot being Alan 
Pratt, with Ron Helm as observer and ballast in the 
second seat. During a soaring flight over Sutton Bank
94

--- PAGE 97 ---
TYPE 14, GULL2
extensive spin tests were carried out with satisfactory 
results, but, even with their differential gearing, 
application of the ailerons when initiating a turn 
created strong adverse yaw. In any case, a sailplane of 
this span would be much slower in the roll than the 
smaller, lighter aircraft to which pilots were accus- 
tomed. The tail unit was modified to increase the fin 
area and the fuselage may have been lengthened. 
These alterations were found necessary to improve 
yawing stability and control. The tail moment arm was 
relatively short for such a large span.
Very long ailerons, as shown on the published 
general-arrangement drawings of 1945, were fitted 
when the Gull 2 was first built. During the development 
flying in 1952 they were greatly shortened, by six rib 
bays, at the inner ends. The intended effect was to 
lighten the feel of the lateral controls without much or 
any loss of control effect. At the same time, reduction 
of the twisting loads on the wing imposed by aileron 
deflections at high airspeeds reduced the likelihood of 
control reversal. Despite these improvements the Gull 
2's ailerons were never good, and what they were like 
before the changes must be wondered. Roy Procter, 
who became a member of the owning syndicate after 
1957, wrote:
At low speeds there was really excessive (adverse) 
drag which could not always be countered with the 
rudder. It was often better to make turns with full 
rudder and opposite aileron to use aileron drag to 
get some turn going! This took a bit of getting used 
to, but was OK once you got the hang of it. At high 
speeds the aileron stick forces were very high and 
produced little effect on the flight path. This was due 
to insufficient torsional stiffness of the wing. The 
hinge moment caused the outer wing to rotate about 
a spanwise centre in the opposite sense to the 
aileron. Result nil. You could watch the wing and 
aileron rotating in opposite directions from the 
cockpit, which was interesting.
A fault that was even less easily overcome was the 
ground attitude. The wheel was slightly in front of the 
loaded e.g. so the tailskid was down even when two 
pilots were in the cockpit. Before take-off the wing was 
at or very close to its stalling angle. As a result, aileron 
control during the critical moments of a take-off run 
was quite inadequate. Normally a wingtip runner will 
keep a sailplane's wings level for a few yards but is 
quickly left behind. When the runner let go if the tail 
had not by then been raised, the Gull 2 would be moving 
forward with a stalled wing and little or no aileron 
control. If a wingtip went down, which it often did, it 
could not easily be brought up again and a dangerous 
ground loop would result unless the pilot released from 
the tow at once. The awkward moment could be 
avoided by holding the control column forward to bring 
the tail up immediately. After this the trick was to keep 
the sailplane rolling on the wheel in a flying attitude 
until it was ready to leave the ground, which it tended 
to do rather abruptly. Once airborne it behaved better.
Nearly 15 years late the Gull 2 was given its 
Certificate of Airworthiness. It was by now considered 
out-of-date, since new low drag 'laminar flow' wing 
profiles had come into use and had produced large 
improvements in sailplane performance. Wing load- 
ings had increased. Slingsby's own Type 42 Eagle, a 
tandem two-seater with the new profiles, came into 
service in 1952 with a wing loading of over 26kg/nr 
(Tx^Blb/ft2). Soaring techniques had changed. In 
competitions, floating away downwind to an unpre- 
dictable destination was no longer good enough. 
Flights were now navigated along prescribed courses 
with speed points in competitions for those who com- 
pleted the set tasks. Yet in the hands of a skilful pilot 
the Gull 2 showed itself to be capable of very fine 
achievements under these new circumstances. The air- 
craft now belonged to a syndicate including Roy and 
Ann Procter and Brennig James. The group improved 
the ground attitude by fitting a longer, leaf-spring tail- 
skid with a castering wheel. This reduced the wing's 
angle of attack slightly, made ground loops less dam- 
aging and helped ground handling. The group painted 
it yellow overall, the only markings being the BGA 
number 664 in small characters at the base of the fin.
James entered it in League 1 of the British National 
Championships, held at Lasham in July and August 
1957. It was up against the latest single-seat sailplanes, 
Skylarks 2 and 3 and an Olympia 403, as well as some 
older types. A couple of Slingsby two-seat Eagles also 
entered this league. During the competition James in 
the Gull 2 established new National two-seater 
records, for speed round a 100km (62 mile) triangle 
and speed to a declared goal of 100km. The latter stood 
for 25 years, though this was perhaps because no-one 
actually bothered to attack it. On 31 July 1957 the Gull 
2 missed the 200km (124 mile) triangular task speed 
record by 5 min, the award actually going to Derek 
Piggott, in the Eagle, at 35.8kmh (22.2mph). But 
James's crossing of the aerial start line was missed by 
the official timers, which cost him well over 5 min. The 
Gull 2 actually completed the course faster than the T- 
42. After seven contest days James placed 14th in a 
field of 28. Piggott was only two places (31 points) 
ahead, and the other Eagle was 22nd. All of the race 
times were very slow by modern standards, but the 
style of contest indicated the substantial change in 
emphasis since the Gull 2 was conceived. That the 
Type 14 was capable of holding its own against modern 
aircraft nearly 20 years after it had been first planned at 
Kirbymoorside says a great deal about the vision that 
inspired it.
On another occasion, Brennig James climbed the 
Gull 2 in cloud to more than 4,200m (14,000ft). It was, 
he said, 'a super ship, and gave us a lot of fun'. 
Unfortunately it did not survive much longer, being 
totally destroyed in an accident at Lasham owing to the 
lack of aileron control during the take-off. Roy Procter, 
who himself had had some adventures with the Gull, 
described the result when a new syndicate member 
attempted his first flight in it:
95

--- PAGE 98 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
A wing touched on aero tow take-off and despite a 
thorough pre-flight briefing he didn't pull off. Full 
opposite rudder could not stop the yaw. The ailerons 
could not be deflected as the ground prevented this. 
When considerable yaw had developed, the pilot 
realised he could not continue and pulled off. 
Relieved of the pu