-26-2. Note 
the absence of auxiliary struts. (Slingsby collection.)
The prototype T-31B with the auxiliary bracing strut and 
spoilers. (Slingsby collection.)
A Royal Navy Gliding and Soaring Association T-31 pre­ 
paring for launch. Another T-31 is in the background. 
(Charles E. Brown, RAF Museum, Hendon, neg. No. 6689- 
12.)

--- PAGE 156 ---
A T-31B in service with the RAAF support group in 
Singapore, about 1967. (J. Wilson)
The instrument panel of a T -31B in Malaysia, including artifi­ 
cial horizon and other instruments not normally fitted.
A Royal Navy T-31 just after take-off on winch launch in 
Wfe 
1951. (Fox Photos)
**$

--- PAGE 157 ---
The cockpits and instrument panels of an Air Cadets T-31 B. 
The instruments are an airspeed indicator, altimeter and 
variometer—all that are required for simple training flights. 
(M. Simons)
An Air Cadets T-31 B at Dunstable in 1990, following restora­ 
tion after sale on the government surplus market. 
(M. Simons)
A rare photograph of the T-35 Austral in service with the 
Renmark Gliding Club in South Australia, 1959. (Alan 
DeLaine.)

--- PAGE 158 ---
Root sections thickened
Gottingen 549
Experimental 
enlarged rudder
Tip 
NACA2R2 12
Skylark canopy 
used
Prototype for test flights
Slingsby Type 34 
Sky
Drawn by Martin Simons 1992 
(£/

--- PAGE 159 ---
Type 34, Sky
There is no substitute for span,' Fred Slingsby was 
once heard to say. In sailplane performance this 
remains true, and probably always will. The current 
generation of open-class sailplanes have spans of any- 
thing from 23 to 26m (75 to 85ft). In 1950, however, 
sailplane wing spans of more than 18m (59ft) were con- 
sidered somewhat too great, and although many 
earlier German aircraft and Slingsby's own two-seat 
Gull 2 had reached about 20m (65.6ft), 18m repre- 
sented an accepted limit. Since sailplanes often have to 
be transported by road, the wing was normally divis- 
ible on the centreline into two equal pieces. A two- 
wheeled light trailer less than 10m (32.8ft) long could 
be towed safely by an ordinary car.
The best contest sailplane available at this time was 
the 18m German Weihe (pronounced approximately 
'Vyer', to rhyme with fire), which had been designed in 
1938. The Olympia was in effect a 15m version of this 
famous aircraft. It was almost inevitable that Slingsby 
should be advised to produce a new sailplane which 
would meet and beat the Weihe. Types 32 and 33 never 
advanced beyond the design study stage, so the 
number allotted to the proposed new high-perfor- 
mance single-seater was T-34. The name Sky was not 
chosen until after the prototype had flown. It was 
invented by John Furlong, using the initial letters of 
Slingsby, Kirbymoorside, Yorkshire. Furlong ordered 
the first of the new type off the drawing board.
The obvious way of improving the performance of a 
good small sailplane was to extend the span, and this 
was what Slingsby proceeded to do. This had the very 
important advantage that it would allow the re-use of 
most of the jigging and tooling used to produce the 
Gull 4, and many of the components would be the 
same. While such an exercise might seem relatively 
simple, there are difficulties.
The span increase was achieved by adding two extra 
bays to the centre section of the wing and increasing 
the spacing of the outer main ribs to 350mm instead of 
300mm. The main spar was a box-type of spruce with 
plywood shear webs, and the greater span necessi- 
tated a complete redesign of this most vital member.
The bending and shear forces at the centre of such a 
wing are large, and the spar had to be much stronger 
than that required for the smaller Gull. The spar flanges 
inboard of bay nine in the centre section were widened 
in plan view, and the depth of the spar was increased 
considerably towards the root. The resulting structure 
was quite complicated, and one aerodynamic conse- 
quence was that the aerofoil section at the extreme 
root end of the wing had to be increased to 22 per cent 
depth instead of the 13.85 per cent of the standard 
Gottingen 549 profile. The weight of the main spar so 
constructed was a quarter of the total structural weight 
of the sailplane.
The rest of the wing was of standard form with a 
plywood skinned leading edge, the grain of the birch 
plywood laid diagonally to resist torsional loads. The 
plywood over the inner wing panels was 2mm thick, 
reducing to 1mm near the tips. This stressed skin was 
supported by numerous light nose ribs to preserve an 
accurate profile and stiffen the plywood against sec- 
ondary failure. The outer panels of such a wing tend to 
flex in bending and torsion during flight, and tip move- 
ments up and down of a metre or so had to be allowed 
for. The need in soaring to change direction frequently 
in search of the strongest part of thermal upcurrents 
requires effective ailerons. These on the T-34 were spilt 
into two segments to prevent them binding at the 
hinges as the wing distorted, and were driven by 
tubular steel pushrods rather than cables. Rigging the 
Sky was facilitated by the simple three-pin system of 
attaching the wings to one another and to the fuselage, 
but the weight of the wings was a disadvantage. It was 
claimed that a trained crew could rig the aircraft from 
its trailer in 6min, but what was not stated was the 
number of people required for this exercise. It could 
not have been fewer than four or five unless trestles 
and auxiliary wheeled trolleys were available.
The airbrakes used on the Gull 4 had been of the ver- 
tical parallel-ruler type developed originally by 
Schempp-Hirth in Germany. On the Sky these were 
replaced by the DFS type of brake with paddles above 
and below the wing which lay flush with the surfaces
157

--- PAGE 160 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
when retracted. On opening these brakes, the lower 
paddle moved down and back, the upper paddle up and 
forward, the aerodynamic loads on the two surfaces 
tending to balance one another. Some difficulties were 
found when closing the brakes on the prototype at 
moderately high airspeeds, which required several 
modifications before fully satisfactory operating loads 
were achieved. They were also increased in size.
The fuselage of the Sky from the wing forward was 
identical to that of the Gull 4. The prototype Sky flew 
with a rather angular built-up transparent canopy, but 
in production this was replaced by a blown bubble. 
Behind the wing, to keep the tail moment arms in pro- 
portion to the greater span, the fuselage was stretched, 
with an increased number of cross-formers and stiffen- 
ers while retaining the same cross-section. The tail unit 
was adapted directly from the Gulls. The rudder 
proved somewhat too small, and various experiments 
were tried to improve this before the final arrangement 
was adopted. A simple landing wheel was fitted, but to 
reduce drag for major competitions, the Sky was avail- 
able without the wheel, a drop-off dolly being used for 
take-off and landings being made on the skid alone.
The prototype T-34 first flew in September 1950, and 
favourable reports appeared almost at once. It handled 
well and was safe and strong. Before long, comparison 
flights against the Weihe were made, and it was 
claimed that these demonstrated a clear advantage for 
the new type. In some important respects these claims 
were justified. The Sky showed measurable improve- 
ment over the old German aircraft at high flying 
speeds. For cross-country flying and racing in anything 
but the poorest conditions the Sky would certainly do 
better, gaining speed and distance in the glide, even if 
not climbing quite so well in weak thermals. It was not 
made clear in any of the published data that the Sky 
and Weihe differed in weight and wing loading. The 
Slingsby type was heavier and stronger, which gave it a 
greater wing loading and hence a better glide at high 
speeds. Had the two been compared at identical 
weight, any performance advantage for the Slingsby 
type would probably have disappeared.
The BGA later published figures based on flight tests 
which showed the Sky to have a best glide ratio of 
about 27.5 at 34kt airspeed, the Weihe reaching 29 at 
36kt. The best glide ratio of the Weihe was superior and 
its minimum rate of sink was fractionally better. In 
practice the difference between the two types, allow- 
ing for experimental error in the test flying, was proba- 
bly negligible. What was more important was that the 
Sky was readily available at an attainable cost from a 
British factory.
Two Skys competed in the British National Contests 
held at Camphill in July 1951. John Furlong's aircraft 
was flown by Geoffrey Stephenson, well-known for his 
cross-Channel soaring flight in the Gull 1 in 11)39. The 
other Sky was piloted by Jock Forbes. who had made a 
great reputation flying with the British Air Force of 
Occupation gliding clubs in Germany. Two Weihes, 
flown by Philip Wills and Lome Welch, constituted the
main opposition. The contest had several remarkable 
features. On one day Stephenson s barograph failed to 
record correctly the height he had gained in a cloud 
flight, costing him 52 points. On another day Forbes 
attempted an out-and-return flight to Flamborough 
Head, relying on a photograph he proposed to take of 
the lighthouse to prove that he had reached the pre- 
declared turning point. This was the first occasion ever 
on which a glider pilot used a camera to prove the 
rounding of a turning point in a competition. Forbes 
did reach the lighthouse, but had to land a short dis- 
tance inland on the return journey. His photo when 
developed was almost indecipherable. The final result 
of the competition after seven days' flying depended on 
whether he could establish that he had in fact rounded 
the Head, which would give him a small winning 
margin. After some fairly frantic telephone calls it was 
established that the lighthouse keeper had seen and 
logged the appearance to seaward of a red glider at the 
appropriate time. Forbes won with 877 points over 
Stephenson, with 873, and Welch and Wills took third 
and fourth places with 804 and 800.
At the Festival of Britain exhibition, held on the 
south bank of the Thames in London later in the year, 
the prototype Sky was suspended in the transport hall 
among other aircraft as a recognition of its design 
excellence.
It was not surprising that the British team of Forbes, 
Stephenson, Wills, Welch and Foster, sent to Madrid 
for the World Championships in 1952, should be 
equipped with Slingsby Skys. Two others of the type 
were flown by the Argentinian team, and one by 
Ordelman of Holland. To the great delight of the British 
Wills won the championships from the Frenchman 
Gerard Pierre, with Forbes in third place. Slingsby's 
latest product was thus established as one of the great 
sailplane designs. The Sky had proved itself. Orders 
came in, with exports as well as sales on the home 
market, and for a time the T-34 was recognised as the 
best available contest sailplane. Stephenson won the 
British Nationals in 1953.
Yet only 16 of the type were built. This was a modest 
success, but not at all the kind of result Slingsby must 
have hoped for. For its period the Sky was quite costly, 
and with much less expensive gliders such as the 
Olympia on the market there were1 not many individu- 
als or clubs with the capital to buy one. In other coun- 
tries during this period new sailplanes with very 
significant improvements in performance over pre-war 
German design were beginning to appear.
The 1954 World Championships, held at Camphill 
(forever remembered because they were almost 
washed out by rain) were won by the French Breguet 
901 flown by Pierre, with Wills in his Sky second. A 
Weihe 50 from new German production came third, 
showing that even this old type could still do well, 
especially in difficult weather. Meanwhile, outstanding 
work by the aerodynamicist August Raspet and Dick 
Johnson in the USA had produced the RJ-5 sailplane, 
which, after very skilful rebuilding, smoothing and
158

--- PAGE 161 ---
TYPE 34, SKY
sealing, achieved a best glide ratio of 40:1 using NACA 
low drag '6 Series' wing profiles. The Breguet 901 used 
these sections and achieved a glide ratio of 36:1. By 
1954, it was clear to anyone that design concepts 
dating back to 1938 were no longer appropriate. The 
success of the Sky was short-lived. Even so, as late as 
1958 in Argentina, Sky sailplanes placed third, fourth 
and fifth in the National Championships.
Today, several T-34s are flown in Britain and are trea- 
sured by their owners. These include BGA 685, the 
prototype; BGA 686, the third off the production line in 
May 1951; and BGA 698, first registered in 1953, which 
has been fitted with a Skylark cockpit canopy. It is not 
known how many of those that were exported have 
survived, but some that were sold to Dutch and Swiss 
owners have more recently been returned to Britain, 
and one at least has been exported yet again.
Type 34 Sky data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o. a. 
Wing sections
Root
Mid-span
Tip
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
18m (59.06ft)
17.37m-(187ft-)
18.7
7.65m (25ft lin)
Goltingen 549 thickened 
Gottingen 549 
NACA2R, 12
249.5kg (5501b) 
362.9kg (SOOlb) 
20.9kg/m2 (4.281b/ft2.)
An early experiment with a much-enlarged rudder with aero­ 
dynamic balance. This was not adopted for production. 
(Slingsby collection.)
The prototype T-34 showing the original built-up cockpit 
canopy, small rudder and translucent doped fabric covering. 
(Slingsby collection.)
An early production Sky outside the factory at 
Kirbymoorside. (Slingsby collection)
159

--- PAGE 162 ---
Wills in the Sky taking off on a winch launch. (Charles E 
Brown, RAF Museum, Hendon, neg No. 6568)
Philip Wills flying his Sky with the landing skid instead of the 
fixed wheel arrangement. Performance tests by the BGA 
Test Group 1 based at Lasham showed a gain of one point in
the best glide ratio for this configuration. (Charles E. Brown, 
RAF Museum, Hendon, neg No. 6598-3}
During the National Championships, a goal race to 
Dunstable from Camphill was won by Geoffrey Stephenson. 
Jock Forbes was placed second and Philip Wills, in the 
Weihe, came third. The two winning Sky aircraft are seen 
here after landing at Dunstable on 21 July 1951, with the 
Olympia flown to fourth place on this day by Tony Goodhart 
behind them, and Wills's Weihe on the left. (M. Eacock)
Geoffrey Stephenson in the cockpit, preparing to take off. 
His wife and crew chief Beryl assists. (Charles E. Brown, 
RAF Museum, Hendon, neg No 6613-12)

--- PAGE 163 ---
I 
I
Rigging detail of the Sky. Two horizontal pins aligned on the 
same centre attach one wing to the fuselage. When the 
other wing is similarly attached the last pin is inserted to join 
the upper flanges of the main spars. Aileron and brake 
pushrods are linked with pip pins. (P. J. Teagle)
Airbrake detail of the Sky. When retracted, the brake paddle 
lies flush with the wing. ( M. Simons]
BGA 685, a restored Sky which has been a frequent par­ 
ticipant in vintage rallies in recent times, at Dunstable. 
(M. Simons)
Instrument panel and cockpit details of Sky BGA 686. 
Instruments, from left to right and top to bottom, are airspeed 
indicator, electric variometer, altimeter, mechanical vario­ 
meter (PZL), artificial horizon, turn and slip indicator, Cobb- 
Slater variometer, oxygen pressure gauge and Cook 
compass. (P. J. Teagle)
AVB

--- PAGE 164 ---
J_499-4-457-|-407-|-470—430
I-438-I-392-I-4544-536-I—575
Root section 
NACA633 618
Tip section 
NACA64J618
Slingsby Type 37 
Skylark 1
Drawn by Martin Simons 1994

--- PAGE 165 ---
Type 37, Skylark 1
Several lines of thought converged to produce the first 
Slingsby Skylark, which began test flying in March 
1953. According to Slingsby himself, the prototype was 
built 'for a lark', hence its name. There was a serious 
purpose behind this 'lark', and with its subsequent 
development it led to something of a golden age for the 
Yorkshire company. It was numbered Type 37 in 
Slingsby's sequence. (The T-35 Austral was the one off 
extended-span version of the T-31, and the T-36, a pro- 
jected two-seat development of the T-34 Sky, was never 
built.)
In a highly competitive market a successful sailplane 
was judged chiefly by its performance and price. 
Slingsby argued rightly enough that, despite the advan- 
tages of a large wingspan, a small aircraft should 
always turn out cheaper to produce than a large one 
using similar materials. If the performance was not 
much poorer or, with improved aerodynamic design, 
even superior to contemporary 15m sailplanes such as 
the Olympia, and if the price was lower, sales of a new 
type ought to be good. There was also some need for 
research into the lateral controls of sailplanes which, 
with their high aspect ratios and relatively large 
moments of inertia in the rolling plane, tended to be 
sluggish when changing direction and suffered from 
severe adverse yaw caused by aileron drag. Moreover, 
they were occasionally prone to aileron reversal at 
moderately high speeds. Application of aileron could 
cause the wing to twist so much that the control 
became ineffective or reversed (an example being the 
T-14 Gull 2). Many sailplanes were notoriously heavy 
on the ailerons. Rudders, in the absence of any slip- 
stream from a propeller, were seldom adequate.
In the autumn of 1952 some preliminary design work 
was begun. To facilitate the research the wing was 
designed in three pieces, consisting of a parallel-chord 
centre section with detachable outer panels which 
could be changed as required to try out different types 
of control, including tip spoilers coupled with short- 
span ailerons, different tip sections and varying 
amounts of washout. The three-piece design also obvi- 
atod the need for heavy and expensive metal fittings at
the root ends of the wings, where, in orthodox prac- 
tice, they were joined to one another and to the fuse- 
lage at the point of maximum stress. Carrying the 
mainspar through in one piece, with appropriate dihe- 
dral built in, saved both weight and cost, as the fuse- 
lage could be suspended below such a wing using the 
simplest and lightest of fittings. The connection 
between the outer wing panels and the centre section 
was made by a single vertical steel pin inserted from 
above, with very simple automatic alignment and 
connection of front and rear drag fittings.
At this time Slingsby appointed John Reussner, a 
qualified engineer from Hull, as draughtsman and 
designer, and it may have been at Reussner's sugges- 
tion that Slingsby decided to use the NACA '6 series' 
wing sections. The original intention had been to use 
the older four-digit profiles which had been successful 
on the Gull 1 before the Second World War. The out- 
standing performance in the USA of the RJ-5, using the 
newer so-called laminar flow profiles, caused sailplane 
designers all over the world to revise their ideas, and a 
major advance in performance was expected. The sec- 
tions chosen for the T-37 were the NACA 63 3618 for the 
centre section, tapering to the 64 3618 at the tip, with 
3.5° of washout to prevent tip stalling. The 63 section 
should have a laminar boundary layer to 30 per cent of 
the chord (as indicated by the second digit), and the 64 
section to 40 per cent. As denoted by the last two 
digits, the wing was 18 per cent of the chord in thick- 
ness. The figure 6 relates to the camber, which was 
large compared with that used for powered aircraft, 
and the sub-scripted 3 referred to the width of the low- 
drag range, or 'drag bucket', of these profiles. An 
important advantage of the new sections was that, 
even though they were thick, their very wide 'drag 
bucket' allowed a sailplane to perform well at low 
speeds for soaring and at high speeds for penetrating 
sinking air between thermals. Preliminary calculations 
showed that with 13.72m (45ft) span with these low 
drag profiles, the Skylark would not only be cheaper 
but would also outperform larger types.
To get the advantage of laminar flow in the boundary
163

--- PAGE 166 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
layer, the RI-5 had proved that it was absolutely neces- 
sary to make the wing accurately and to prevent the 
development of waves and humps, particularly over 
the forward third of the chord. Quite a small hump or 
hollow, and even small blobs of paint or fly specks in 
this region, could cause the boundary layer to become 
turbulent. A 'low-drag' section with the flow forced 
into premature turbulence would actually produce 
more drag than one of the old-fashioned profiles. Dick 
Johnson had completely rebuilt the wing, and spent 
many hundreds of hours levelling and smoothing the 
surfaces of the RJ-5 before the sailplane began to 
perform up to expectations. To maintain this per- 
formance the levelling and smoothing process had to 
be repeated every season.
Hitherto, production sailplanes had usually been 
skinned with birch plywood, often with the grain laid 
diagonally. The ply was as thin as possible consistent 
with strength and stiffness, to save weight. Hence 
there were waves in the skin even as a new sailplane 
emerged from the factory, and after a short time in 
service these became more prominent as the wood 
shrank slightly, producing something of a 'starved 
horse' appearance, with every rib visible from the 
outside. Where the plywood was glued to the mainspar 
there was always a marked bump running from tip to 
lip on both upper and lower surfaces. With the older 
types of wings the penalt ies were not very great, but 
the new profiles demanded much more attention to 
these details.
I laving recognised the problem, Slingsby adopted a 
radical solution. Instead of thin, high-density birch 
ply, an African gaboon plywood of low density and 
greater thickness was used. Gaboon, rather a soft 
wood, had not been well liked for aircraft construc- 
tion previously, and the greater stiffness of the 
material necessitated a different approach to manu- 
facture and surface finish. Thin birch ply can be per- 
suaded without very elaborate moulding techniques 
to bend right round the leading edge of a wing, so that 
the skin can be continuous from the bottom round to 
the top of the mainspar. This was not feasible with 
gaboon, so the extreme leading edges of the Skylark 
wing were made from an accurately machined and 
spindled hollow member of spruce, with rebates top 
and bottom to accept the edges of the plywood. The 
skin was then applied in separate panels above and 
below, with careful attention to the leading-edge 
joints to prevent irregularities. This was largely 
successful. The Skylark wings were much more accu- 
rate and wave free than those of previous sailplanes, 
and remained quite good in service. To preserve accu- 
racy over the rest of the wing the plywood skin was 
carried aft to the auxiliary spar, only a small area of 
the wing near the trailing edge being fabric-covered. 
The outer wing panels and ailerons were entirely ply 
skinned. To protect the rather soft outer veneer, light- 
weight cotton fabric was doped on to the plywood 
before painting. Airbrakes of the well tried Schempp- 
Hirth type were installed and, according to Slingsby,
proved to be very effective, even more powerful than 
strictly necessary.
The rest of the Skylark 1 was very orthodox, even 
somewhat crude, since it was regarded as an experi- 
mental aircraft. The fuselage was adapted cheaply 
from that of the T-30 Prefect trainer, being a wooden 
space frame with a simple cockpit and an upright, 
rather cramped and uncomfortable seating arrange- 
ment. The undercarriage was a simple rubber-sprung 
skid. The tailplane, like the wing, was skinned with 
gaboon ply. It was intended to produce a more refined 
streamlined monocoque fuselage for series product ion 
once the wing design had been proved.
After preliminary test flights, the Skylark was flown 
in the British National Championships by Anthony 
Deane Drummond, the distinguished soldier and pilot. 
The EGA handicappers rated it about equal to the 
much larger and more expensive 18m Sky and Weihe, 
with a best glide ratio about 27:1. The features that 
Deane Drummond praised most were the very effec- 
tive lateral controls and the absence of adverse aileron 
drag, suggesting that the research had paid off. His 
chief criticism of the Skylark was that it had a higher 
wing loading and hence a greater stalling speed and 
larger circling radius than he had been accustomed to. 
He thought these were disadvantages for British 
soaring conditions. In good soaring weather the T-37 
was excellent. Deane Drummond was placed fifth in 
the individual list, a good result considering the limited 
time he had had to get Used to the aircraft.
A second T-37 was built for South African pilot Pat 
Beatty to fly in the 1954 World Championships at 
Camphill. In miserable weather which produced a bare 
minimum four days' flying, in common with several 
others he scored points on only one day. Afterwards 
the Skylark was taken to South Africa. What became of 
it there is not known. The one that remained in Britain 
was sold by Slingsby and still exists, though it is now 
very rarely seen or flown.
Technically, the T-37 was a very considerable 
advance for Slingsby. It is interesting to speculate on 
what might have happened if he had done as origi- 
nally intended and produced a new version with 
exactly the same wing and a superior fuselage and 
cockpit. The wing loading of 28.8kg/irr (5.891b/ft2), 
which was considered so high in 1953, now seems 
extraordinarily light when sailplane pilots commonly 
load up their aircraft with large quantities of water 
ballast to achieve loadings nearly twice as great. 
Already in 1953 the mighty HKS 1 from Germany was 
flying successfully with higher wing loadings, and the 
Breguet 901, which won the wretched 1954 World 
Championships, had a wing loading comparable to 
that of Sling's little Skylark. The Breguet, however, 
had enormous Fowler flaps which enabled it to turn 
tightly in small, weak thermals. As it was, Slingsby 
allowed the collective voice of British pilots to con- 
vince him that the Skylark should follow a more con- 
servative line of development; more span, more wing 
area, lower wing loading.
164

--- PAGE 167 ---
Type 37 Skylark 1 data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o. a. 
Wing sections
Root
Mid-span
Tip
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
13.7m (45ft)
10.5m2 (H3ft2)
17.9
6.39m (20.95ft)
NACA63 3618 
NACA63 3618 
NACA64 0618
196.5kg (4331b) 
302kg (6651b) 
28.8kg/m2 (5.891b/ft2.)
Tony Deane Drummond taking a winch launch in the proto­ 
type Skylark at the 1953 British National Championships at 
Camphill. (Slingsby collection)
Beatty takes a winch launch at Camphill during the 1954 
World Championships. (M. Eacock)
The prototype Skylark survives in Britain but is not often 
flown. It is shown here, carrying the contest number 234, in 
company with the later developments Skylark 2, 3 and 4. 
( Wills collection)

--- PAGE 168 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
The Skylark was unusual in having a three-piece wing com­ 
prising a central section with two tip sections. The airbrakes 
were in the centre panel, the ailerons confined to the outer 
panels.
The prototype Skylark on the ground at Lasham in 1953. The 
wheeled dolly was used for ground handling. The fuselage 
was taken with minimal changes from the Prefect training 
sailplane, the most noticeable alteration being a reduction in 
height to allow the cantilever wing to be attached on a 
broader pylon.
166

--- PAGE 169 ---
Before the 1954 World Championships, the South African 
pilot Pat Beatty took delivery of the second Skylark and flew 
it at Dunstable. He is seen here in the cockpit, with the 
canopy about to be put in place by his countryman, Heli 
Lasch. (M. Eacock)
In this photograph it is Lasch's turn to try the Skylark while 
Beatty looks on. (M. Eacock)
167

--- PAGE 170 ---
Wing section 
Gottingen 426
Slingsby
Type 38
Grasshopper
Drawn by Martin Simons 1992 
v£)

--- PAGE 171 ---
Type 38, 
Grasshopper
It seems extraordinary at first that while Slingsby was 
working on the technically advanced and innovative T- 
37 Skylark 1 in 1952-5:3, he should revert to the produc- 
tion of a primary glider. The British gliding movement 
had almost totally abandoned solo training methods by 
this time, and there was no demand from the civilian 
clubs for such primitive aircraft. However, there were 
many schools with Combined Cadet Force units, in 
which boys could receive some basic military training. 
The officers were usually schoolmasters who had 
gained experience in the Services during the Second 
World War. Boys who were interested in the army had 
guns to work and drill with, and those who were keen 
on the Navy could learn to row, sail and navigate boats. 
There was nothing of similar kind for the air-minded 
cadets. Members of the Air Council recognised that 
this was an unsatisfactory state of affairs, and the idea 
that the cadets could have an elementary glider to play 
with appealed to the authorities. Such machines could 
be used for instruction in airmanship, aircraft struc- 
tures and controls. The cadets could learn how to rig 
and inspect gliders, and even carry out simple repairs. 
It would not be necessary for the aircraft to be fully air- 
worthy.
The EON Type 7 primary glider, available new from 
Elliotts of Newbury, was a straightforward copy of the 
successful German SG-38, fully certificated for flight 
including aero-towing. About 90 had been built but 
many were not sold, being allowed to stand idle in 
storage. A few, named the Eton TX-1 by the ATC and 
RAF, were in use. It was, however, remembered that 
the ATC had a large number of the old Slingsby T-7 
Cadet wings, and more spare sets of wings from Cadets 
were in stock at Kirbymoorside, following conversion 
of the aircraft into Tutors. A new fuselage frame could 
be made to take Cadet flying surfaces which would 
need some servicing and very little modification. It 
would be possible to produce a large number of suit- 
able, non-airworthy gliders very quickly and more 
cheaply than buying the Eton.
Slingsby was very happy to undertake the work of 
overhauling the wings, many of which were quite old
and glued with casein. Tail units were also taken from 
old Cadets. The new fuselage was very similar to that 
of the SG-38, the only important difference being that 
the telescopic springing system used on the skid of the 
German type was replaced by a simpler suspension 
system of hard rubber rings. Provision was made for 
ballast weights to be fitted to allow for small and light 
boy pilots. To prevent the pupil from over-controlling 
and perhaps even getting the glider off the ground into 
some dangerous attitude, a locking pin could be 
inserted to restrict the movement of the elevator.
Flight testing of the T-38 Grasshopper was under- 
taken by Derek Piggott, launching by aero-tow to 900m 
(3,000ft). Presumably the aircraft used was carefully 
checked and was fully airworthy, since it was not feasi- 
ble to carry a parachute. The ailerons were not differ- 
entially geared, and severe adverse yaw was 
experienced when entering turns. The vertical tail area 
was found to be too great, it being impossible to yaw 
the aircraft straight with rudder during the hold-off for 
a crosswind landing. This was corrected by removing a 
large area of fabric covering from the rear bays of the 
gate-like tailboom. The Grasshopper would enter a 
spin with full up elevator and full rudder and opposite 
aileron, but would spiral out after about one full turn.
Adopting an idea from the old German gliding 
schools, the primary glider could be suspended on a 
pendelbock for the boys to get some feel for the con- 
trols. The pen del bock was a tripod on which the glider 
could be suspended on a universal joint about its e.g. In 
a wind the controls would all work correctly, and a boy 
on the seat could use ailerons, rudder and elevator to 
change attitude without actually leaving the ground.
Having established that the glider was at least con- 
trollable, manufacture, (or remanufacture) began. A 
total of 115 were delivered. Many spare parts and a 
great deal of repair work were necessary during the 
following years, all quite profitable to the company.
A training school for the cadet officers was estab- 
lished at Detling, Kent, where Derek Piggott was 
working. The procedure was to give each schoolmas- 
ter at least one genuine flight in a T-21 Sodbergh to
169

--- PAGE 172 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
teach the effects of the controls, even allowing the 
student to do the landing. After this the course was 
confined to bungee launching the primary glider up 
and down the airfield. With one person strapped safely 
on the glider's seat, four on the bungee, a wingtip 
runner and someone holding back the tail as the 
bungee was stretched, the work was hard, and at the 
end of a good day each student would have had four or 
five ground slides or very low hops. It was exhausting, 
and Piggott remembers sometimes praying for rain so 
that they could have a rest. On one occasion a course 
continued to operate in deep snow, with fog in dead- 
calm air reducing visibility to 100 yards. The group 
operating the glider wandered about, launching, 
hopping and launching again until a fence was encoun- 
tered, after which the glider was turned and launched 
again and again until another fence was found. After a 
short time the group was totally disoriented and did 
not know in which direction to find the hangar.
The amount learned on these exercises was depress- 
ingly small in relation to the physical effort put into 
them, and eventually winch launching was used to 
speed things up. Even so, progress was very slow com- 
pared with two-seater training. With their new-found 
skills and a glider, the officers could return to their 
schools and keep the boys busy for hours. An inexperi- 
enced group following the instruction manual could 
spend most of a day simply rigging the glider, and it 
would often be wrongly set up at the end.
Each cadet group was supplied with a rubber bungee 
for ground slides. Strictly, the cadets were not supposed 
to fly, but many did achieve hops, either intentionally or 
by accident. The ballast weights provided were often 
wrongly disposed or not fitted, so a lightweight cadet 
would sometimes find himself off the ground in a climb- 
ing attitude. If the locking pin was in place the restricted 
stick movement would prevent adequate corrective ele- 
vator action, even if the pupil knew what to do. George 
Locke, who already had achieved his A and B 
Certificates, contrived to remove the locking pin fr