# Slingsby Sailplanes — Martin Simons


--- PAGE 1 ---
COMPREHENSIVE 
HISTORY OF ALL * 
DESIGNS
Martin Simons

--- PAGE 2 ---
Slingsby Sailplanes
This book describes Slingsby sailplanes 
and gliders from the British Falcon of 
1931 to the last motorless aircraft 
produced - the Vega. Each type is 
illustrated with an accurate full page, 
three-view drawing, with photographs 
and text outlining the background to the 
design. The drawings are based on the 
original workshop plans.
Slingsby was for fifty years the main, and 
for most of the time only, producer of 
gliders and sailplanes in Britain. The 
company was one of the first to use glass 
fibre reinforced plastics in production 
aircraft as early as 1953 and were 
probably the first to use carbon fibre 
composite materials for main structural 
members. Many examples of their 
models are to be found all over the world.
£39.95
RRP

--- PAGE 3 ---
f ttom % ^Tiding Kt&ttattg olf

--- PAGE 4 ---
Slingsby 
SailpTanes

--- PAGE 5 ---
SI i ngsby
Sailplanes
A COMPREHENSIVE HISTORY OF ALL DESIGNS
ffifisl^p^
(I
Martin Simons
Airlife
England

--- PAGE 6 ---
Dedication
To my glider pilot daughters. Patricia and Margaret. 
Keep in practice!
Contents
Introduction
6
Copyright © !!»{»() Martin Simons
First published in the UK in 
by Airlife Publishing Ltd
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book 
is available from the British Library 
ISBN 185:n()7:*2s
All rights resen'ed. No part of this book may be reproduced 
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or 
mechanical including photocopying, recording or by any 
information storage and retrieval system, without permis- 
sion from the Publisher in writing.
Typeset by Srrvis Filmsetting Ltd
Printed in England by Livesey Ltd, Shrewsbury
Airlife Publishing Ltd
101 Longden Road, Shrewsbury. SY:J DEB. England
Scarborough 1931-34
Types 1 & 2, the British Falcon 
Type 3, Primary Glider (Dagling) 
Type 4, the Falcon 3 
Type 5, the Grunau Baby 2 
Hjordis
Kirbymoorside 1934-39
Types 6 and 23, Kirby Kite
Type 7, Kirby Kadet (Cadet TX Mk 1)
Type 8, Kirby Tutor and Motor Tutor
Type 9, King Kite
Types 12 & 15, Kirby Gull
Type 13, Petrel
Type 14, Gull 2
Second World War 1939-45
Type 18, Hengist 
Type 20 
TVpe21,Sedbergh
Post-war
Type 24, TX. 8/45 Falcon 4
Type 25, Gull 4
Type 26, Kite 2
Type 30, Prefect
Type 31, Tandem Tutor (TX Mk. 3 Cadet)
and T-35 Austral 
Type 34, Sky
The laminar boundary layer
Type 37, Skylark 1 
Type 38, Grasshopper- 
Type 41., Skylark 2 
Type 42, Eagle and T-55 Regal 
Type 43, Skylark 3 
Type 45, Swallow 
Type 41), Capstan 
Type 50, Skylark 4
Wood, metal or glass? 1965-69
Type 51, Dart 15 & 17 R 
Type 53, Phoenix 
Slingsby Schreder HP-14
Vickers Slingsby
TVpe 59, Kestrel 
Type 65, Vega
The end of sailplane production 
References
11
19
27
31
37
45
53
61
67
75
85
93
99
105
111
121
127
135
143
151
157
163
169
173
179
185
193
199
205
211
221
229
237
249
256

--- PAGE 7 ---
A photograph of the Derby Club's T-21B by George 
Thompson. Note the sharp outer corner to the elevator 
which was changed on subsequent aircraft.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Introduction
This book describes Slingsby sailplanes and gliders 
from the British Falcon of 1931 to the last motorless 
aircraft produced, the Vega. Each type is given an accu- 
rate three-view drawing, photographs, and text out- 
lining the background to the design and mentioning 
operational successes or occasional failures. Type 
numbers were allocated to some design projects which 
never flew. These and the powered aircraft produced 
by the company are not included in this volume. l
Full sets of working plans for almost all Slingsby air- 
craft before 1950 were discovered in 1969 by Norman 
Ellison in the lofts above the offices. They were saved 
from destruction, and after a long period in storage are 
now preserved by the Vintage Glider Club. The draw- 
ings by the author in this book are based on these origi- 
nals and on other plans of later types from the 
company's archives, rather than on previously pub- 
lished outlines or extracts from brochures.
Fred Slingsby first built gliders at his furniture works 
in Scarborough, but as the business grew and 
demanded more space he moved for a while into the 
abandoned tram sheds belonging to the town corpora- 
tion. A transfer to Kirbymoorside on the northern edge 
of the Vale of Pickering was made in 1934. (For some 
reason the town is now spelled Kirkbymoorside on 
maps and road signs, but to gliding people it will proba- 
bly always be without the second kk'.) In 1939 a new 
factory was built at Ings Lane, south of the village, 
wrhere it still remains. There were several changes of
1 Two powered aeroplanes begun in 1938 were not com- 
pleted. Early in the Second World War components were 
made for A\TO Ansons. In the postwar period there were 
two examples of the Motor Tutor, and a single experimental 
powered version of the two seat T-49 Capstan sailplane was 
tested in IMS. Six replica S.E.oAs, a Sopwith Camel and 
two Rumpler C. IV First World War replica fighters were 
built at this time with some non-flying mock-ups for the film 
industry. Thirty-two Tipsy Nippers were produced under 
contract for the Nipper Aircraft Company. Other powered 
projects were the T-40 Hayhow and the extraordinary 
Cameo V-Liner, neither of which was completed.
The T-61 was a licence-built version of the Scheibe SF;35 
Falke motor glider, modified and renamed Venture for use
ownership, and a period of closure when the company 
was in receivership during 1969. The works reopened 
later in the same year. Glider design and production at 
Kirbymoorside then continued until 1982. The modern 
company, Slingsby Aircraft Ltd, is exclusively con- 
cerned with powered aeroplane manufacture.
A full appreciation of the part played by each of the 
Slingsby sailplane types described in the following 
pages requires a brief outline of the historical back- 
ground and technical development of soaring.
The origins of a sport
Before their first powered aeroplane flights, the Wright 
brothers made many trials with gliders, and on about a 
dozen occasions achieved soaring flights of more than 
a minute's duration. The longest of the four famous 
powered flights on 17 December 1903 was still of less 
than 60 seconds endurance and another year passed 
before they exceeded this time.
In 1911 Orville Wright returned to Kill Devil Hills, 
North Carolina, with a glider. On 23 October he made a 
soaring flight of 9min and 45sec. Many years after- 
wards he was asked why he went back to gliding after 
eight years. His 'official' explanation was that some 
serious testing of a new control system was to be done, 
but this was only part of the reason. At the age of 68, 
Orville admitted that he found soaring to be more fun 
than flying with an engine.2 A new sport had been dis- 
covered.
by the Air Training Corps. Deliveries began with a batch of 
15 T-61Bs in 1977, and 25 T-61Fs with glassfibre mainspars 
were produced in 1980. There were also sales of the T-61 on 
the civilian market, bringing the total of all marks to 76.
In June 1980 the Slingsby company reached agreement 
with the Fournier Aviation Company to build the RF-6B 
light aeroplane. This soon led to the development of the T- 
67 Firefly which, completely redesigned for fibre reinforced 
plastic construction, proved to be a great success and is, at 
the time of writing, in full production, being used interna- 
tionally by many flying clubs and air forces including the 
USAF.
2 Reported in P. A. Schweizer, Wings Like Eagles, p. 6 
(Smithsonian Inst Press, 1988).

--- PAGE 9 ---
INTRODUCTION
The first gliding competition also had a serious 
purpose. The Versailles Treaty of 1919, ending the First 
World War, banned aeroplanes in Germany. Many 
pilots, aircraft manufacturers and students of aero- 
nautics saw a bleak future for German aviation, but 
gliders were not specifically mentioned in the prohibi- 
tion. Wolfgang Klemperer and his younger friend Erich 
Meyer, who had experimented with hang gliders in 
Dresden before the war, saw the loophole. Early in 
1920, in an article in the magazine Flugsport, they sug- 
gested that a glider competition should be held in the 
Rhon mountains of the Fulda district. The dome-like 
Wasserkuppe, swampy in places and at that time 
covered by unfenced pastures, had been successfully 
used for gliding during several pre-war summers by a 
group of schoolboys from Darmstadt.
Oscar Ursinus, editor of Flugsport, supported the 
idea of the competition with enthusiasm and agreed to 
take on the organisation. Under his guidance the two- 
month-long meeting from mid-July into September 
was modestly successful despite a fatal accident. 
Klemperer himself, recently appointed to an academic 
post in the Aerodynamics Institute of Aachen 
Technical College, made the best flight in the 
Schwarzer Teufel (Black Devil), a cantilever mono- 
plane glider which he had designed and built with his 
students in the Institute. From the beginning, sailplane 
development in Germany was closely associated with 
such student flying groups, the Akafliegs.
The Rhon contests became annual sporting events, 
continuing even after the lifting of the ban on powered 
flight in 1925. A full-time gliding school was estab- 
lished on the Wasserkuppe, and another at Rossitten 
on the sand dunes of the Baltic coast. Extended slope 
soaring flights of several hours were achieved in 1922, 
and thermal upcurrents were discovered in 1925 and 
used systematically from 1928. Cross-country flights of 
more than 150km had been achieved by 1930. Sailplane 
and glider building factories, notably those of 
Alexander Schleicher at Poppenhausen near the 
Wasserkuppe, Edmund Schneider at Grunau in Silesia 
and Gerhard Fieseler at Kassel, were established.
Apart from a brief flurry and one lively meeting at 
Itford Hill in 1922, very little interest was shown in 
Britain until the news of the German successes filtered 
through to the pages of The Aeroplane magazine. The 
British Gliding Association (BGA) was formed late in 
1929, and visits by prominent German experts were 
arranged. In February 1930 Professor Georgii lectured 
to the Royal Aeronautical Society on soaring meteor- 
ology, and Fritz Stamer, who was running the training 
school on the Wasserkuppe, described the methods 
used there. The BGA issued its first gliding certificates 
in March that year. Most influential of all, Robert 
Kronfeld brought his beautiful Wien sailplane and 
toured the country, performing a famous slope-soaring 
cross-country flight from Itford Hill to Bedworth near 
Portsmouth on 17 June. Carli Magersuppe, sponsored 
by the Daily Express newspaper, joined the tour with 
a Professor sailplane.
There was an upsurge of enthusiasm. More than 90 
gliding clubs were formed all over Britain, and some 
aero clubs established gliding sections.3 Fifty clubs 
responded to a questionnaire distributed at the end of 
1930. Every club had at least one glider or was in the 
process of building one; some possessed two or three. 
The total active involvement in gliding approached 
2,000 persons. The largest group was the London 
Gliding Club, not yet settled at Dunstable, with 112 
members, three club gliders and four privately owned 
machines.
Slingsby
Frederick Nicholas Slingsby, born on 6 November 
1894, had joined the Royal Flying Corps in 1914, and as 
a flight sergeant gunner/observer earned the Military 
Medal, when after his pilot had been killed in the air, he 
regained control and flew the aircraft back to the 
British side of the trenches. He remained in the service 
(by this time the Royal Air Force) until 1920, at which 
time he bought a partnership in a woodworking and 
furniture factory in Queen Street, Scarborough, on the 
east coast of Yorkshire. Early in 1930 newspaper 
reports of the BGA's foundation were brought to his 
attention by a young dance band leader named Sanders 
who knew of Slingsby's service experience. With a few 
friends they founded the Scarborough Gliding Club in 
February.
The manager of the luxurious Royal Hotel joined and 
was elected chairman. Members came to meetings in 
the hotel wearing their best suits for a good meal 
beforehand. There were lectures and discussions. 
Flying operations began with a Dagling glider bought 
from the R. F Dagnall Company of Guildford, Surrey. 
They flew at weekends and on Wednesday afternoons, 
using sites at Flixton Hill, due south of the town, and at 
Sutton Bank, overlooking the Vale of York. Amy 
Johnson agreed to become president of the club. This, 
and the Scarborough Council's support, helped to 
attract members, especially after the spectacular but 
rather unsuccessful demonstration by Kronfeld and 
Magersuppe on Castle Hill above the town in July. 
Magersuppe's Professor sailplane was damaged when 
it hit a fence on take-off, and he came down in the sea 
to be rescued by a fishing boat. Despite this, he was 
appointed instructor to the gliding club at a salary of 
£10 per week. By the end of 1930 the club had 40 active 
flying members, and more than twice that number 
were paying small subscriptions to become social 
members and, doubtless, joining the festivities at the 
Royal Hotel.
Slingsby gained his A and B gliding certificates 
during the year, becoming the first Scarborough 
member and only the 30th person to do so according to 
the BGA register. The A certificate required a straight 
glide under control lasting 30sec. By the end of the year
:] The information about clubs in 1930 comes from the Dorset 
Gliding Club's yearbook, Gliding, issued in 1931.

--- PAGE 10 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
the club had trained six members to this standard. 
Sanders, the band leader, was not one of them. The B 
Certificate required a flight of Imin and two further 
flights with safely executed right- and left-hand turns 
with good landings. Three of the six Scarborough 
members achieved this. (The training methods used 
are described in the chapter on Slingsby's Type 3 
Primary.)
The Dagling was broken regularly, and Slingsby, the 
club's ground engineer, found himself and his factory 
constantly involved in repairs. He was forced to 
present bills for materials and working hours spent 
away from his business. Thus he entered the gliding 
industry as an ancillary to his regular occupation. He 
had a sound background in aircraft woodwork and 
rigging, and was an excellent draughtsman. The 
factory provided tools and machinery. His workmen, 
he said, began to prefer working on the glider to furni- 
ture making. Slingsby had no formal qualifications in 
aeronautics or engineering but was ready to employ 
qualified consultants. He had a shrewd business sense 
and a great enthusiasm for gliding.
The development of soaring technique
In 1930, knowledge of soaring in Britain was almost nil. 
Gaining height in the upcurrent on the windward side 
of a hill proved fairly easy. Anyone with a B certificate 
and a certain confidence could do this. After being 
bungee launched from the crest the glider was flown 
steadily along the hill to the end, performing a gentle 
turn there to come back and fly to the other end of the 
beat to turn again. Every turn was made away from the 
slope. As long as the wind blew sufficiently up the 
gradient a moderately efficient glider, flown well, could 
soar, possibly rising several hundred feet above the 
launching point. An extended soaring flight of 5min 
earned the C certificate. It was quickly learned that to 
turn or drift behind the hill was to be forced down to a 
premature landing.
The next important development came more slowly, 
hampered for the first few years in Britain by the total 
lack of any instruments in the gliders. To exploit 
thermal upcurrents to make cross-country flights over 
level ground seemed almost miraculous at first, and 
veiy few understood how it was done. The slope- 
soaring pilot could judge his rises and falls fairly well 
by observing the level of the hill, but as soon as a 
sailplane was more than a few hundred feet up, the 
lack of a \isual reference made it impossible to tell if 
height was being gained or lost, Turbulence felt in the 
air might indie-ate either lift or sink. Airspeed was mea- 
sured by the force of the airflow on the face and by the 
humming of the flying wires. Altimeters were not used. 
The main requirement was a sensitive rate of climb 
indicator, or variometer. German pilots began using 
these in 192S.
In 1931 Kronfeld again came to Britain, gliding 
across the English Channel from a high aero-tow. Ha 
made a cross-country flight in thermals over London 
from Hanwoith, south of Richmond, to Chatham, on
the Thames estuary. On the following day he returned, 
passing directly over Croydon on the way to land back 
at Hanwoith. This was one of the first successful goal 
distance flights. He was observed to circle repeatedly 
in the narrow cores of the thermals to gain thousands 
of feet before gliding off in the direction he chose to go. 
Despite such demonstrations, and subsequent lectures 
and publications, it was not until 8 January 1933 that a 
British pilot, Eric Collins, dared to perform a complete 
360° turn in a sailplane.4 In August of that year the first 
thermal soaring cross-country flights were attempted 
in Britain, Collins setting a British distance record of 
just under 50km. By this time, flights of over 270km had 
been made in Germany.
When good variometers, sensitive altimeters and air- 
speed indicators became available, British pilots soon 
learned to use them. The technique was to circle and 
climb in each thermal and then glide on to find the next 
one, climb in it to the top and move on again. By 1936 
sailplanes were sometimes also fitted with gyro instru- 
ments to enable them to fly blind, taking advantage of 
the strong lift inside cumulus and cumulo-nimbus 
clouds. Airbrakes, or at least lift spoilers, became 
essential to allow safe landings in small spaces. The 
Silver C certificate, requiring a cross country of 50km, 
a 1,000m gain of height and a duration of 5hr, was insti- 
tuted internationally in 1931. Collins was the first 
Briton to achieve this, in 1934. By the end of 1939, 56 
British pilots had so qualified.
Before the outbreak of the Second World War, flights 
over 200km and one over 300km had been achieved in 
England, the last, together with a height climb in cloud 
to over 14,000ft, earning the International Gold C 
badge for Philip Wills.5 The English Channel was 
crossed in soaring flight from Dunstable by Geoffrey 
Stephenson in April 1939, flying a Slingsby sailplane, 
the Kirby Gull. The Second World War then intervened, 
bringing a general ban on soaring until 1946.
Penetration
In the post-war period, with mathematical studies 
pointing the way, the importance of speed was recog- 
nised. The length of a good soaring day is limited to a 
few hours. Some heating of the ground is needed to set 
off thermals, and this usually meant waiting until about 
10 a.m. or later before starting a cross-country flight. 
The land cools in the evening, so to achieve a worth- 
while distance the pilot needed to make a high average 
speed while the conditions lasted. The sailplane 
designer was now required to produce an aircraft with 
a low rate of sink when circling, but which on leaving 
the lift zone would glide at a high airspeed without 
losing too much height. Only the best part of each 
thermal should be used to improve the average rate of
4 A. E. Slater, Sailplane and Gliding, December 1963, p. 452.
5 Wills was the fourth pilot in the world to achieve this, after 
Eugen Wagner, Heini Dittmar and Hermann Zitter. Wagner's 
name was omitted from some earlier published lists.

--- PAGE 11 ---
INTRODUCTION
climb, then in the glides the airspeed must be 
increased, even at the expense of lost height. This 
improved the average cross-country speed, always 
supposing that another strong thermal could be found. 
If there was sinking air it was proved by calculation 
and experience that it was essential to fly through it 
fast, the height lost by putting the glider's nose down to 
gain airspeed being much less than that wasted by lin- 
gering too long in the bad air. The requirements are to a 
large extent incompatible. To achieve the lowest possi- 
ble rate of sink at slow airspeed, a low wing loading 
and a very-high-aspect-ratio wing are necessary. 11 To fly 
very fast with minimal loss of height in the glide 
requires a high wing loading, together with wing profile 
drag and the parasitic drag of tail and fuselage reduced 
to an absolute minimum.
Low-drag, so-called laminar flow wing profiles devel- 
oped in the USA were found to be very useful, but 
required new approaches to glider construction and 
new materials. The aircraft became heavier with 
greater and greater spans. To remain safe at high 
speeds they had to be much stronger and stiffer than 
before. High-strength metal alloys began to find their 
way into the structures. To place a check on escalating 
costs, a simple 15m span Standard Class specification 
was developed internationally, and proved successful, 
but the unrestricted 'open class' sailplanes continued 
to grow in complication and cost.
As aircraft and the pilots improved, gliding competi- 
tions changed from simple distance and goal flying to 
racing round prescribed courses. The need for 
penetration, the ability to glide fast at a shallow angle, 
became more and more urgent. Given a good glide 
angle at high airspeed, the racing pilot can sample a 
large mass of air in a short time, passing through the 
weaker thermals without circling in them. Only those 
that yield high rates of climb are selected. The need for 
low rates of sink in circling remains, still demanding 
high aspect ratios.
Further researches in aerodynamics produced 
better wing profiles, but these required even more 
accurate, wave-free wing surfaces. Careful attention to 
the form of fuselages and tails yielded worthwhile
(1 Aspect ratio is the relationship of the wing span to the total 
area. A narrow wing of large span has a high aspect ratio. 
The ratio may be calculated by dividing the span by the 
average or mean chord of the wing. The wing loading is the 
relationship of the total flying weight of the aircraft to the 
wing area, found by dividing the weight by the area.
savings in drag. Traditional materials such as spruce, 
pine and plywood, even metal, were no longer good 
enough. Glassfibre, carbon and aramid fibre-reinforced 
moulded plastics were widely adopted.
With the new profiles and materials, even higher 
wing loadings were demanded. Some German 
sailplanes were fitted with water tanks as early as 1934, 
but carrying ballast did not become general until the 
1970s. Given that the pilot will circle only in the strong- 
est thermals, some loss of climbing ability owing to the 
extra weight is more than compensated for by the 
improved glide at high speeds. The water- can be jetti- 
soned if the thermals weaken. Some modern single- 
seat 'open class' sailplanes with spans of about 25m (82 
ft) may carry 200 to 250kg (440-5501b) of ballast on 
take-off.
The most recent development has been the wide- 
spread introduction of self-launching. A retractable 
motor with a propeller is built into the sailplane, dis- 
pensing with the need for launching apparatus or aero- 
towing, and with the business of retrieving sailplanes 
by road after out-landings. The weight of the propul- 
sion unit becomes unimportant in a sailplane, which 
will normally be loaded with water ballast anyway. The 
long-term influence of this development on the tradi- 
tional gliding club remains to be seen. There is nothing 
now to prevent a soaring pilot from keeping the 
sailplane at an ordinary aerodrome, taking off unaided 
and flying to the open country, where the engine will be 
shut off for several hours but started up again to fly 
home in the evening to join the regular landing pattern 
and taxi in.
The best glide ratio of a sailplane   the measure of 
how far it can glide in still air from a given height  is a 
useful indication of all-round aerodynamic efficiency. 
Slingsby's British Falcon in 1931 probably achieved 
about 16:1 and weighed about 230kg (5061b) in flight. 
By 1982 the best open class sailplanes had glide ratios 
close to 60:1 and weighed 750kg (l,6531b) fully bal- 
lasted. Corresponding figures for good 15m sailplanes 
like the Vega were 42:1 and 508kg (l,1201b). Slingsby's 
Falcon was used for a 20km (12.4-mile) flight soon 
after it was completed. In 1982 the world record dis- 
tance flight for a sailplane stood at 1,460km (907 miles) 
but, more importantly, the 1,250km (750-mile) tri- 
angular flight speed record stood at 133.2kmh 
(82.76mph). Slingsby sailplanes were produced during 
the half-century while these advances were taking 
place, and it was never easy to keep up.

--- PAGE 12 ---
0)
Wing sections
Type 2 fuselage
was entirely skinned
with plywood
\/ Strut
details
Scale 2 x
CO
Slingsby Type 2 
Falcon 2
Slingsby
Type 1
British Falcon
Drawn by Martin Simons 1994 
(£)

--- PAGE 13 ---
Types 1 and 2, 
the British Falcon
Having achieved his A and B gliding certificates, Fred 
Slingsby was anxious to make progress. For early 
soaring attempts beginners needed a mild-mannered 
sailplane that would not respond too sharply to clumsy 
handling, yet had a sufficiently low rate of sink to allow 
sustained flight in slope lift. In 1930 there were few 
intermediate gliders between primary trainers and the 
advanced sailplanes of the experts. One type used in 
Germany was the Priifling, virtually a primary glider 
wing with a fuselage hung below it on struts. Its per- 
formance was poor and it was not very stable. A few 
had appeared in Britain. Giinther Groenhoff, a young 
German pilot already establishing a high reputation, 
visited the Scarborough Gliding Club in the winter of 
1930, and following Groenhoffs recommendation, 
Slingsby decided to build for himself, from plans 
obtainable through the Rhon-Rossitten Gesellschaft 
(RRG, the controlling body for gliding in Germany), a 
Falke. He was warned that it was not very easy to 
build, but he was confident that he could manage it.
The Falke had been designed by Alexander Lippisch 
in 1929, and it owed almost everything to the experi- 
mental tailless sailplanes which Lippisch had been 
developing since 1925. Flying models with wingspans 
of about 4m had been flown before the first full-scale 
Storch was tried in 1927 with limited success. It was 
followed by improved versions. The Storch 4 which 
Groenhoff tested in 1929 was entirely satisfactory. 
Stability was obtained with a back-swept wing having 
negatively twisted outer panels, or 'washout'. Tip wing- 
lets and rudders gave adequate control in yaw. The 
main improvement distinguishing the Storch 4 was the 
installation of lobate ailerons, or elevens, with their 
hinge line at 90° to the line of flight, rather than con- 
forming to the wing sweep. The wing section at the 
root and for the inner panels was a modified version of 
the Gottingen 535, but the profile was progressively 
changed to a strongly reflexed shape at mid-elevon, 
and thence to a thin symmetrical tip. 1
Lippisch s experiments with tailless aircraft culminated in 
the Me !(>:* rocket powered fighter of the Second World War.
Lippisch, who was head of the technical section of 
the RRG, decided that if a sailplane with no tail could 
be made stable with a sweptback wing, then a glider 
with sweepback and an ordinary tail unit as well would 
be even more stable, and hence exactly what the begin- 
ner required. Moreover, with such a layout the pilot 
would be well protected, sitting under and somewhat 
behind the centre of the parasol wing. An adequate 
soaring performance could be ensured by keeping the 
wing loading down, which could be done by using a 
large wing area with strut and wire bracing, giving a 
strong yet light structure. Little attention need be paid 
to reducing drag. Sailplanes were launched directly 
into the slope upcurrent by rubber bungee, and there 
was no need to have a good glide ratio for cross 
country flights. The Falke was not expected to go any- 
where except gently back and forth in front of a hill. It 
was considered an advantage for an intermediate 
sailplane that it should not gain much airspeed in a 
dive. In the inevitable accidents it would not strike the 
ground so hard.
When Groenhoff met Slingsby the Falke was in pro- 
duction in Germany. There was already one in 
England; it had been imported for publicity purposes 
by the J. Lyons tea company.
Gliders at this time were always built of wood. The 
timber normally used in Germany was pine. Spruce 
was more expensive and offered only slight advan- 
tages. Aircraft-quality birch plywood was readily avail- 
able. Cold-water casein glues were approved for 
aircraft construction and, provided the joints were 
kept dry, were perfectly satisfactory but damp joints 
could be quickly destroyed by fungus. Accordingly, 
numerous drainage and ventilation holes were incor- 
porated at all points in the structure where moisture 
might otherwise accumulate. Mild steel fittings and 
brackets were bolted to the timbers after painting with 
zinc chromate. Steel control cables were guided round 
pulleys and through fibre fairleads where required.
The Falke fuselage, of hexagonal cross-section, was 
a wooden framework of six curved longerons with 
cross-frames and diagonal braces, with plywood
11

--- PAGE 14 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
skinning in front and fabric covering aft of the cockpit. 
As usual where wooden members butted together sub- 
stantial plywood 'biscuits' or solid corner blocks were 
used to cany the loads through the joint. The under- 
carriage comprised a rubber-sprung main skid of ash, 
and a tailskid. An open hook was fitted under the nose 
for bungee launching. The strut-braced tail unit was 
simple, but the wing was very complicated. The twro 
spars, swept at 12.5°, were built-up box sections. The 
upper and lower pine flanges had large 'bird-mouthed 1 
blocks filling in wherever fittings had to go, particu- 
larly at the root ends and the strut end points. Both 
sides of the spars were faced with plywood. The wings 
had a slight 'gull' kink, enough to complicate construc- 
tion without having any measurable effect on stability 
or handling.
To make each wing rib, an outline of 5mm square 
strip wood was laid in a jig, being steamed where nec- 
essary to conform without strain to the aerofoil section 
outline. Uprights and diagonals were fitted inside this 
form, and 1mm plywood biscuits and webs were then 
glued over all the joints, after which a duplicate 5mm 
square strip outline was laid into the jig with matching 
uprights and diagonals, and glued. This split-rib struc- 
ture, which persisted for many years in German 
sailplane construction, prevented sideways distortions 
of the ribs when they were under the tension of doped 
fabric covering. The wing chord was constant over the 
inner panels, which allowed some saving in work, but 
for the tapered and reflexed outer wing panels every 
rib differed from the next.
In the Falke and other training gliders, the plywood 
covering the front of the wing was little more than an 
unstressed fairing. Each rib was made in one piece 
from leading edge to trailing edge and slid into place 
over the completed spars before gluing. Because the 
plywood was glued only to the ribs, not to the spar 
flanges, it added little st rength to the wing as a whole. 
For torsional rigidity a two-spar structure with internal 
diagonal cross-struts was used. Every third rib was a 
compression member requiring its own jigging. The 
wing spars met on the aircraft centreline with simple 
pin joints, the rear pin also connecting with the pylon 
behind the cockpit. The front spars had separate 
connections to the braced vertical cabane struts on 
either side. The V struts restrained the wings from 
folding up or down under load, and provided addi- 
tional bracing against torsion. A detachable plywood 
fairing covered the gap in the wings at the centre. The 
aileron control cables ran externally up the side of the 
fuselage, entering the wing just behind the forward 
cabane strut. The elevator cables also were external 
for part of their length. There was a steel bracing cable 
from the nose to the struts near their outer ends.
Slingsby completed his Falke in the spring of 1931. 
He stated that roughly 800 man-hours were required. 
Probably furniture production in his factory was much 
reduced for the preceding months. On completion the 
sailplane, in clear-doped finish and glossy varnish, was 
christened British Falcon. Slingsby made his first brief
flight at Levisham Moors after a bungee launch 
powered by schoolchildren. Another pilot crashed the 
Falcon badly on its second flight. After repairs, 
Slingsby toured the country in search of good soaring 
sites, gaining his C soaring badge in September at 
Ingleby Greenhow and competing very successfully in 
the 1932 National Championships at Ireleth, near 
Askam-in-Furness, Lancashire. There were seven com- 
peting aircraft. The Falcon logged nearly 7hr total 
flying time during the five day meeting. Mungo Buxton 
borrowed it to break the British distance record with a 
20km slope-soaring flight to Lake Coniston. To put this 
into perspective, in the German championships that 
year there were 60 sailplanes. Cross-country flights of 
150km (93 miles) were made, but Groenhoff, Slingsby's 
adviser of 1930, was killed in one of two fatal acci- 
dents.
It was remarked that the Falcon flew itself, but 
handled easily when it was required to manoeuvre and 
was capable of soaring well. It was a great builder of 
confidence for nervous pilots. Rigging was rather a 
struggle, and it suffered from lack of upward view 
when turning. This became important as the soaring 
ridges grew more crowded, but for its purpose it had 
few rivals. Slingsby announced later in the year that he 
would build a Falcon for anyone for £95.
The second Falcon, which Slingsby later counted as 
his Type 2, was built to the order of Espin Hardwick, a 
stockbroker who played an important role in the 
development of British gliding. Falcon 2 was flying by 
October 1933, Hardwick obtaining his C soaring badge 
at a Sutton Bank meeting in that month. The Type 2 had 
rounded wingtips which improved its performance 
slightly, and its fuselage was entirely skinned with 
plywood. Hardwick suffered from a spinal deformity, 
so most ordinary sailplane cockpits must have been 
extremely uncomfortable for him. His Falcon had 
extensive padding and movable elbow rests, and it also 
possessed instruments, which very few other 
sailplanes in Britain did in 1933.
Sling