than half a turn, falling 
out into a spiral dive. Winch launching tests showed 
nothing untoward, though a very low maximum air- 
speed on the winch cable of 39kt was imposed and the 
recommended landing approach speed was 38kt, only 
one knot slower. In performance trials a minimum rate 
of descent of approximately 78m/min (260ft/min or 
4.3ft/sec) was measured at an airspeed of 35kt This 
placed the TX.8/45 firmly in the circuit training cate- 
gory.
122

--- PAGE 125 ---
TYPE 24, TX.8/45 FALCON 4
An important defect of the aircraft was aileron 
flutter, which showed up at airspeeds above 65kt. This 
was almost certainly because the ailerons were of 
unusually broad chord and large area, with their centre 
of mass behind the hinge line. Mass balancing, which 
might have cured or at least alleviated the problem, 
would have added more to the total weight of the air- 
craft which was already heavy enough.
During the winch launching trials in August 1948 an 
accident led to the writing-off of VM118. Only one 
TX.8/45 remained. In January 1949 VM109 passed from 
Beaulieu to the No. 168 Gliding School of the ATC at 
Detling, where it remained until March 1950. It then 
moved on to other ATC units, spending most of one 
year in storage before being sold to the Western Area 
Gliding Club at Cosford in March 1953. What became 
of it then is not known.
Type 24 Falcon 4 data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Wing section
Weights
Tare
16.56m (54ft 4in) 
24.7m2 (266ft2) 
11.1 
NACA2R-12
360kg (7921b) (VM109)
351kg (7751b)(VMl 18) 
All-up 
544kg (l,1971b) (VM109)
528kg (l,1621b)(VM118) 
Wing loading (max)22.0kg/m2 (4.51b/ft2)
21.3kg/m2 (4.41b/ft2)
The nose section of the fuselage, showing the cockpit area 
under construction. The substantial wheel bearers are 
visible, with the steel strut fittings protruding from the sides 
of the main frame. The footholds for climbing into the cock­ 
pits can be seen. (Slingsby collection)
123

--- PAGE 126 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
The T-24 under construction at Hooton Park. The fuselage, 
inverted during assembly, is shown on its jig. The framework 
was based on four main longerons and a substantial keel
member, with light cross-frames. Plywood skinning was 
added later. (Slingsby collection)
The starboard wing of the flapped T-24, seen from the 
wing. To carry the flaps, the secondary spar had to be quite 
underside and showing how the hinge points for both flaps 
substantial. (Slingsby collection) 
and ailerons were positioned flush with the underside of the
•1MB
The starboard wing of the spoiler-equipped T-24 almost 
under the tension of the doped fabric aft of the main spar, 
ready for the covering. The very light secondary spar func- 
(Slingsby collection) 
tioned only to prevent the wing ribs from distorting sideways
124

--- PAGE 127 ---
TYPE 24, TX.8/45 FALCON 4
Very few photographs of the completed T-24 in flying trim 
exist. For official purposes, the sailplane was photographed 
on the ground from four aspects. A head-on, profile, three- 
quarter front and three-quarter rear views accompanied the 
official AFEE report. These show VM109, the prototype with 
flaps, which was the last survivor of the three built. It was
painted standard RAF training yellow all over, with roundels 
on fuselage sides with the 'P' prototype marking and the red, 
white and blue fin flash. Large roundels were painted above 
and below both wings. The lettering on the rudder cannot be 
deciphered. (Public Record Office, Avia 21/300)
The only other known photograph of the T-24 is this head-on 
view which survives in the RAF Museum collection at 
Hendon.
125

--- PAGE 128 ---
Prototype 
canopy
Inspection panels 
on starboard side 
only
500 -*k500 -1*400-1*5
CO
Instrument 
panel
Wing profiles
Gottingen 549
thickened at
root
Bubble 
canopy
Tip NACA 0009
Slingsby Type 25 
Gull 4
Drawn by Martin Simons 1993

--- PAGE 129 ---
Type 25, Gull 4
A small mystery surrounds the birth of the Slingsby 
Type 25 Gull 4. Despite its type number, the prototype 
appeared about nine months later than the Type 26 Kite 
2. Partly as a result, the Gull 4 missed the market which 
it deserved. It was an excellent sailplane but not a com- 
mercial success. It is not clear why Slingsby did not 
give it the priority it should have had. He may have mis- 
judged the temper of the British gliding movement and 
underestimated the demand that would appear for a 
good, up-to-date 15m high-performance sailplane. He 
seems also to have over-estimated the potential of the 
Kite 2.
The advertising brochure which Slingsby issued in 
1947, by which time the Kite 2 was already available, 
indicated that the Kirby Gull 4 would have the same 
root wing profile as the Gull 3, NAG A 4415, and a 
similar wingspan, 15.32m (50.25ft). The tail unit also 
was similar to that of the old Gull. There was to be a 
new fuselage with a longer tail moment arm and better 
cockpit. The wing would have straight dihedral instead 
of the old-fashioned and more expensive gull form. 
What Slingsby had in mind was an improved version of 
the most successful single-seat sailplane he had pro- 
duced in the years of peace.
He would probably have done much better by stick- 
ing to this plan, if it would have resulted in the new air- 
craft becoming available in 1946 instead of a year later. 
But these preliminary ideas were almost completely 
abandoned, and Slingsby began speaking of the Gull 4 
as a replacement for the Olympia. It should rather have 
been a direct competitor, and would have been so had 
it been on the market sooner. As early as December 
1944 it was claimed that the new Gull would have a 
better performance than the Olympia. What the 
Yorkshire company needed to do was to get one into 
the air as soon as possible and demonstrate this.
It had been agreed before the outbreak of the 
Second World War that the Olympic Games scheduled 
for 1940 would include a soaring contest. To place the 
emphasis on skill rather than equipment, it was deter- 
mined that all competitors should fly the same type of 
aircraft. A specification was drawn up for a suitable
15m span sailplane capable of being built from easily 
obtained materials without costly machine tools. A 
design competition was held and six prototypes, from 
Germany, Poland, Switzerland and Italy, were flown for 
assessment at a special meeting at Sezze in Italy in 
1939. The Meise, designed by Hans Jacobs and built by 
DFS, won this competition.
The Meise was a smaller version of the 18m Weihe 
which was already in production and had achieved a 
great reputation. It was constructed of wood along 
orthodox lines, was fully up to specification in strength 
and handling, and it had no complications or costly 
metal fittings. Straight dihedral was used as the expen- 
sive traditional gull wing form was, at last, recognised 
to be unnecessary. It had powerful airbrakes of 
Schempp-Hirth 'parallel ruler' type rather than units of 
the DFS's own design, which were more complicated 
and less effective. The elevator had a trim tab, and the 
cockpit was roomy and comfortable   at least for 
pilots of average height. Tall pilots found their heads 
well back inside the leading edge of the wing, which 
restricted their view to some extent.
After the decision at Sezze, the Meise became 
known outside Germany as the Olympic sailplane, or 
Olympia. Complete sets of working drawings were 
made available to all the nations likely to compete. 
However the war began and the 1940 Games were can- 
celled. Gliding has never since featured in the 
Olympics, but the Meise was produced in large 
numbers in Germany and became well known and well 
liked there.
At the end of hostilities Philip Wills visited Germany 
and test flew a number of sailplanes. In his report on 
the Meise he said it was 'one of the finest pieces of bal- 
anced aerodynamic poetry which has been created by 
man'. Compared with almost any other 15m sailplane 
the Meise/Olympia was incomparably better; the con- 
trols were light, well balanced and harmonised, and 
stability was good without making the type pedestrian. 
It required some deliberate persuasion to make it spin, 
but it would do so when required and it was capable of 
all the usual sailplane aerobatics. The performance
127

--- PAGE 130 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
was not as good as that of the bigger, heavier Weihe, 
but was in advance of anything else available in the 
immediate post-war period. Although at the time there 
was no recognised system for classifying sailplanes, 
the Olympia established a concept which had pro- 
found influence on sailplane development throughout 
the world and led eventually to the International 
Standard Class specification.
Early in 1945 Slingsby mentioned plans to manufac- 
ture the Olympia, but the Chilton Aircraft Company 
was already promoting its own version, and soon 
claimed that more orders for the Chilton Olympia had 
been received than for any other high-performance 
sailplane ever built or sold in Britain. This was true, 
though it did not mean very much because the only 
moderately high-performance sailplane built 
in 
Britain, the Kirby Gull, had not achieved double figures 
in production. Very few others had ever been imported. 
According 
to 
Slingsby's 
own 
account, 
the 
Kirbymoorside factory was still fully occupied with 
wartime contracts, and he evidently decided not to 
compete directly He said it was mainly to keep his 
small design team occupied that he decided to proceed 
with a new high-performance design which became 
the Type 25 Gull 4. The T>pe 26 Kite 2 was already in 
production but was proving a disappointment.
The field was thus open to his competitors. Elliotts 
of Newbury, after the rights were taken over from 
Chilton, manufactured the Olympia in quantity. A 
hundred were built and were followed later by another 
batch of 50. The first reached British customers early 
in 1947, and Slingsby had nothing comparable to offer. 
The prototype of the Gull 4 did not fly until late in 1947, 
the first photographs and BGA test group flying assess- 
ments being published in January 1948. By now the 
limited British market was virtually flooded with the 
Newbury products. Only four Gull 4s were built.
The aerodynamic design of the T-25 was obviously 
influenced by German experience. The cantilever 
wing, of 15m span with a rectangular centre section 
and tapered outer panels, had a slightly higher aspect 
ratio than that of the Olympia. The original intention to 
use the N AC A wing profiles like those on the Gull 1 and 
Gull 3 was abandoned. After extensive comparative 
testing in Germany the Gottingen 549 wing profile had 
been chosen by the DPS for the Reiher, a very 
advanced sailplane, in 193(5-37, and for many later 
designs including the Weihe and Olympia. The Gull 4 
used the same root section, tapered to the symmetrical 
NACA 0009 at the tip, with 5° washout. This arrange- 
ment was thoroughly orthodox. To comply with 
revised British strength requirements while reducing 
the weight and cost of central fittings, the wing was 
thickened generously over the last few rib bays near 
the roots. iSchempp-Hirth speed limiting brakes were 
fitted, and were enlarged after first tests of the proto- 
type. The structure was of the usual wooden monospar 
type, with stressed plywood skin over the leading edge. 
The sub-ribs ahead of the spar were spaced at 100mm 
intervals, rather than the more usual 150mm. This
added to the torsional stiffness. Fabric covering was 
used behind the spar and for the ailerons.
The fuselage was also straightforward, being a semi- 
monocoque construction with light wooden frames 
and longerons skinned throughout with plywood. Most 
of the frames were shared with the T-26 Kite 2. The 
wing was mounted on a slight neck or pylon which 
faired neatly into the cockpit canopy. It avoided the 
rather awkward air trap under the wing which was a 
significant aerodynamic defect on the Olympia. A 
landing wheel was fitted, with a sprung ash skid, and 
there was a tailskid.
The tail unit was orthodox, with ample torsional 
stiffeners. The prototype had no trim tab, but instead 
the tailplane was made adjustable. This was soon 
changed to the more practical trim tab arrangement.
The cockpit canopy was built up from several sheets 
of transparent plastic. Plastic bubble blowing at this 
time was often rather imprecise, the resulting canopies 
sometimes not fitting very well, although they gave the 
pilot an excellent, unobstructed field of vision. The 
Gull 4 canopy was a good fit but not so aerodynam- 
ically pleasing. The cockpit itself was comfortable for 
large pilots and, since the headrest was wholly in front 
of the wing, the view was better.
It was generally accepted that the Gull 4 was slightly 
superior to the Olympia in handling, although perhaps 
not such a finely balanced piece of poetry. The controls 
generally had a crisper feel and a quicker response. 
Stability was good. The wing loading was a little 
greater and the stalling speed higher.
A well-known Swedish pilot estimated that the new 
Slingsby type was 10 per cent better all round than the 
Olympia. Performance tests in flight were carried out 
on the second Gull 4 to be built (though not until 1950), 
and the results compared with similar tests of the 
Weihe and Olympia. The best glide ratio was measured 
at 1:24.2, the Olympia at 1:22.5; and 1:29 for the 18m 
Weihe. The minimum rates of sink of the two 15m 
sailplanes were very similar, but the Olympia, capable 
of flying more slowly, would probably have had a very 
small advantage when circling tightly in narrow ther- 
mals. At high speeds the Gull 4 was better than the 
Olympia up to 60kt but not as good as the Weihe.
The first post-war International Soaring Champion- 
ship was held at Samedan in Switzerland during July 
1948. In a field of 37 the British team of six aircraft 
included two Gull 4s, two Elliott Olympias and two 
Weihes, the last pair coming from the RAF clubs in 
occupied Germany. The Gulls were on loan from 
Slingsby and the Olympias from Elliotts. Philip Wills 
and Christopher Nicholson flew the Gulls. This 
competition was the first in which points were gained 
on some days for speed around closed circuits or to 
fixed goals, but points were also awarded for height 
climbs, and most of the tasks were simply flights to 
goals of the pilot's choice, scored primarily for dis- 
tance with bonuses for actually reaching the goal.
It was a tragic competition for the British. On 28 July 
Donald Greig in an Olympia and Chris Nicholson in a
128

--- PAGE 131 ---
TYPE 25, GULL 4
Gull 4 were killed in separate accidents. Greig, flying 
close to a valley side, struck one of the steel cables 
common in this region for carrying bales of hay or logs 
down from the summer pastures. The Olympia lost a 
large piece of its port wing and spun 65m (200ft) down 
into the rocks, killing Greig instantly. Nicholson in the 
Gull 4, on the other side of the same mountain, was evi- 
dently circling in lift funnelled up in a narrow gully near 
Chiavenna, just across the Italian frontier. He had 
mountain walls on three sides and was close to an arete 
or saw-toothed ridge. Probably, as he climbed, cloud 
formed in the gully below and swept up around him. 
Blinded, he was confronted suddenly with the jagged 
spine of rock immediately ahead, pulled up to try to 
clear it, stalled and crashed just over' the other side at 
the summit 3,000m (10,000ft) above sea level. He was 
found quickly by a shepherd and lived for some hours, 
but died before he could be brought to a hospital.
Wills, flying the other Gull, would have placed fourth 
in the final standing, but on the first day of the contest 
his barograph failed and he lost the 4,000 points which 
he should have earned for a climb to 6,000m (20,000ft) 
above sea level. The Gull 4 was, he said, the best 15m 
sailplane he had ever flown. He used airspeeds up to 
75kt to escape severe downdraughts and pushed the 
speed up to 85kt when starting in one of the races. The 
Gull 4 was rock steady at these speeds and quieter than 
the average machine flying slowly. He established the 
British National speed record for the 100km triangle at 
47kmh (29.2mph). Unfortunately, these results were 
too late to assist Slingsby with sales.
After the Internationals, the Gull 4 that Wills had 
flown at Samedan was exported to the Sydney Soaring 
Club in Australia, where it arrived in May 1949 and 
immediately became popular with the members of this 
small group. It was fitted with two-way radio, being 
one of the first sailplanes in the world so equipped. The 
club used the radio for their annual Christmas gliding 
safari, launching the sailplane by aero-tow each 
morning with a different pilot for a cross-country 
flight. The rest of the party followed by road and air to 
launch another member the next day from a different 
site, to complete a soaring tour of the vast inner plains 
of New South Wales and Victoria. Fred Hoinville used 
the Gull 4 to earn the first Australian 'Gold C' badge in 
January 1950.
On a stormy day, 30 December 1950, Martin Warner 
took off from Narromine in New South Wales and 
circled up in the Gull 4 to cloud base at 1,800m 
(6,000ft). Using the turn-and-slip indicator, which was 
the only gyro instrument fitted, he continued climbing 
at a very great rate, measured subsequently on the 
barograph chart as 660m/min (2,200ft/min). He had no 
oxygen supply, but made no attempt to get down until 
6,600m (22,000ft), at which height he opened the air- 
brakes and tried to straighten out on a northerly 
heading. He lost some height at first, but then encoun- 
tered heavy turbulence and even stronger lift which 
carried him, brakes open, to 7,050m (23,500ft) above 
sea level. Lack of oxygen rendered him almost help-
less, and he did not regain control fully until he was 
down to about 450m (1,500ft) in an extremely violent 
downdraught, still in the cloud with hail and heavy 
rain. When he emerged suddenly into clear air he was 
30m (100ft) above the bush in hilly, rock-strewn 
country. He had no option but to make a crash landing 
into the trees, which wrecked the aircraft without 
serious injury to himself. The flight broke the 
Australian records for gain of height and absolute alti- 
tude. The Australian Gull 4 was rebuilt and flew again 
in Victoria, but was again seriously damaged in a 
winch-launching accident. Its remains still exist at 
Tocumwal in New South Wales, but no serious attempt 
has been made to rebuild it.
In Britain, the prototype Gull 4 was bought in 1948 
by the London Gliding Club and served as a popular 
club sailplane for several years. It was entered in the 
National Competitions in 1949, coming fifth in the team 
placings (an Olympia was third). In 1950 it was ninth. It 
was severely damaged in an accident on the Dunstable 
hillside, but the wings were repaired and fitted to the 
fuselage of a Kite 2. In this form it still survives.
The other Gull 4 was bought by the RAF Gliding and 
Soaring Association and flew with the Moonrakers 
club. This aircraft went with the British team to the 
Internationals in Sweden in 1950. On the second 
contest day the canopy came off in the air, and Peter 
Mallett, the pilot, struggled on for another 46km (28.5 
miles) before landing, but inevitably made a relatively 
poor distance. A new canopy was immediately flown 
out from England, but the Gull 4 did not distinguish 
itself in the later days of the contest. After years of 
good service including many cross-country flights and 
competitions, this aircraft was finally written off in an 
accident in 1967.
The Gull 4 never achieved the popularity and 
success it deserved. It demonstrated that Slingsby 
Sailplanes in 1947 could design and build a sailplane 
that was slightly better all round than the German 
Meise of 1939. The next move seemed almost auto- 
matic. A 15m sailplane wing will never perform as well 
as one with a few extra metres of span. Plans were 
soon made for the Gull 4 to be stretched to 18m.
Type 25 Gull 4 data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a. 
Wing sections
Root
Mid-span
Tip
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
15m (49ft 2!/>in)
14.49m2 (156ft2)
15.52
7.25m (23ft g^in)
Gottingen 549 thickened 
Gottingen 541) 
NACA0009
211.8kg(4761b) 
317.5kg (7001b) 
21.97kg/nr(4.51b/ft2)
129

--- PAGE 132 ---
The crashed Gull 4 in the Australian bush near Narromine 
after Martin Warner's 23,500ft record-breaking climb in a 
cumulonimbus. The Gull was rebuilt and flew again for 
several more years. (M. Waghorn)
The rebuilt Australian Gull 4, here seen with a Grunau Baby 
in Victoria. The rather angular cockpit canopy was replaced 
by a blown bubble which improved the appearance and 
reduced drag slightly. The skid and wheel fairings were also 
improved. (G. Hearn)
The London Gliding Club's Gull 4 at Camphill in 1949. Note 
the Schempp-Hirth-type airbrakes, opening above and 
below the wing. The club name was in block letters, shadow
shaded. In the background is the famous cross-Channel 
Gull ^.(M. Simons)

--- PAGE 133 ---
The prototype Gull 4 at Redhill during test flying by the BGA 
Test Group 1. (C. E. Brown, RAF Museum, Hendon, neg No. 
6208-90)
Anne Welch flying the prototype Gull 4 over Redhill. The 
cockpit canopy, built up from separate sections of Perspex, 
gave very adequate visibility but was unfavourably com­ 
pared with the bubble canopies of the Elliott Olympia. 
(C. Brown)

--- PAGE 134 ---
Christopher Nicholson preparing for a flight in the Gull 4. Not 
long afterwards he was killed while competing in the first 
post-war International Championships, at Samedan in 
Switzerland. (Willscollection)
The Moonraker club Gull 4 preparing to take off. The wings 
in this case were clear-varnished all over, showing the 
natural plywood and fabric tones, but the fuselage was 
painted.
132

--- PAGE 135 ---
Philip Wills in the cockpit before going to the competitions in 
Switzerland. Note the thickening of the wing roots to allow a 
deeper spar, and the aero tow release just in front of the skid 
fitting. ( Wills collection)
The Gull 4 at Camden Aerodrome, south of Sydney, in May 
1949 immediately after delivery. The markings put on for the 
international competition are still on the aircraft. Members of 
the Sydney Soaring Club, from left to right, are Keith Collyer, 
Selwyn Owen, Martin Warner and Mervyn Waghorn. 
(M. Waghorn)
Wills, in the cockpit, and Slingsby, confer. The skids of the 
Gull 4s taken to Samedan were lengthened to fair in better 
with the wheel. The prototype, which was sold to the London 
Gliding Club, had a shorter skid. Also visible is the winch 
launching release. (Wills collection)

--- PAGE 136 ---
Kite 2B 
fairing
Open cockpit 
prototype
Kite 2B 
vert cal tail
500-1-500-1-500—472
Skylark type 
canopy
Root section 
NACA2412
Gull 4 
canopy
Kite 2B 
fairing
A 
Air brakes
of Kite 2B
Kite 2A 
wing tip
Rib 22 
NACA4412
Tip 
NACA 0009
600
Slingsby Type 26 
Kite 2
Drawn by Martin Simons 1993 
\Q)

--- PAGE 137 ---
Type 26, Kite 2
Slingsby's Type 23 Kite 1A, of which only one was built, 
mated the wing and tail unit of the old Kite 1 with an 
improved fuselage. There was no measurable improve- 
ment in performance or handling, so Slingsby decided 
to adopt a more radical approach. Although the air- 
craft that emerged as the Kite 2 was described as a 
development of the old Kite, it owed little to the pre- 
war aircraft except its tail unit.
It is not clear who, under Slingsby himself, was 
chiefly responsible for the design of the Kite 2.
The Type 26 had a strut-braced wing and tailplane, 
which was by now considered old-fashioned for a high- 
performance sailplane, but the Kite 2 was never 
intended as a very advanced aircraft. Seen as replacing 
the Kite 1, a step up from the ubiquitous Grunau Baby, 
it was to be inexpensive, easily maintained and safe to 
fly, with a moderately good cross-country per- 
formance. Struts allowed a good deal of weight to be 
saved, especially in the main wing spars, and there was 
no need for expensive or elaborate metal fittings.
Publicity brochures for the Kite 2 advanced another 
argument in favour of strut bracing. By using a strut 
the wing could be made considerably thinner, and the 
resulting saving in wing profile drag at high airspeeds 
ought to compensate for the parasitic drag of the 
struts. The Kite 2 wing was only 12 per cent of the 
chord in thickness at the root end, compared with 16 
per cent or more for contemporary cantilever 
sailplanes of similar span. It was held that the high 
speed glide, or 'penetration', would not suffer. For 
cross-country soaring the ability to fly at high air- 
speeds without losing too much height is more impor- 
tant than minimal weight. On any reasonably good 
day, gaining altitude is not very difficult. Even a rela- 
tively crude training glider will go up in a strong 
upcurrent, but to make distance a pilot needs to find 
and use a whole series of thermals. After a climb, 
reaching the next thermal often requires a long glide 
through lifeless or even sinking air. A light, slow glider 
will gain height easily in any rising air, but loses most 
of it on the way to the next lift and might have to land 
before getting there. It spends too long in the bad air.
A heavier, faster sailplane may not climb quite so 
rapidly, but penetrates downcurrents quickly. A good 
glide at high airspeeds demands minimal parasitic 
and wing profile drag, together with a high wing 
loading.
All of this was now understood in Britain. (It had 
been known longer in Germany.) Saving weight was no 
longer considered very important; reducing parasitic 
and wing profile drag were most necessary. Heavily- 
cambered thick aerofoil sections such as the Gottingen 
535 used on the famous Kranich and Rhonsperber and 
on the Kite 1, were replaced by less-cambered forms, 
the sections often being increased in thickness at the 
root ends to give adequate depth for spars. Even so, the 
wooden mainspar of a typical cantilever sailplane 
might contribute half the total structure weight of the 
aircraft.
It is probably significant that the most advanced 
sailplane built at Kirbymoorside up to this time, Mungo 
Buxton's King Kite of 1937, had increased profile 
camber at the wingtips and only a moderate negative 
twist or 'washout'. This arrangement is common on the 
most modern sailplanes now. (As mentioned previ- 
ously the King Kite failed not because the wing design 
was in error, but because it was incorrectly jigged 
when being built in the factory.) Increasing the camber 
towards the tip of a wing and combining this with a 
only few degrees of washout was in direct contrast to 
the older design technique. Hitherto, almost all 
sailplane designers had tapered the wing to a symmet- 
rical section at the tip, but this necessitated very large 
amounts of washout, sometimes as much as 8° or even 
10° to prevent wing tip stalling. This excessive 
washout had the serious disadvantage of causing the 
outer part of the wing to reach negative angles of 
attack at quite moderate airspeeds. The tips on such 
aircraft as the Rhonsperber and Rhonadler would bend 
down increasingly under the reversed loads, and this 
tended to ruin the performance at the high speeds 
needed for inter-thermal cruising.
At the root, the Kite 2 wing section was NACA 2412 
with, as the first digit shows, only 2 per cent camber.
135

--- PAGE 138 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
This section extended unchanged over the inner wing 
panel, which had constant chord. The tapered section 
of the wing outboard of the strut had a progressive 
change of section to the NACA 4412 with 4 per cent 
camber at rib station 22. Contemporary wind tunnel 
test results from the USA indicated that the 4412 
section would stall at a geometric angle of attack 
about 2° less than the 2412, but the stronger camber 
enabled the 4412 to reach a higher maximum lift coef- 
ficient. To prevent the outer wing from stalling first, 
which would be dangerous, there was 4° of washout 
between ribs S and 22. This gave a safety margin of 
about 2° at the stall. At low angle of attacks in high- 
speed flight the 4412 would reach its aerodynamic 
zero lift angle of attack at about -4°, the 2412 at -2 . 
Hence, even with the 4° of washout the outer wing 
would still be yielding useful lift at high airspeeds. The 
reversed loads would not appear until the sailplane 
was diving quite steeply.
So far, so good. It is not easy to understand the rest. 
From rib 22 to the tip of the wing the Kite 2 wing 
section changed very quickly to the fully symmetrical 
NACA 0009, with 2° of geometric wash-in, (i.e wing 
twist in the other direction). The 0009 section stalls 
at a much lower lift coefficient than the 4412 and at a 
smaller aerodynamic angle of attack. Inevitably, the 
outermost wing panels of the Kite 2 would stall early. 
The wing of the prototype drew puzzled comments 
from those who examined it. The oddity was quite 
apparent as a distinct kink in the leading edge of the 
outermost wing panels and a rapid change of both 
section and angle of incidence. (It was not for junior 
club members to ask too many awkward questions.) 
There was, this time, no question of a factory jigging 
error. Frank Irving subsequently remarked that the 
geometry of the wing between ribs 22 and 27 looked 
very weird on the original drawings.
Another unusual feature of the new sailplane was 
the very high angle of incidence of the wing relative to 
the fuselage. This, too, was apparent at a glance. The 
angle of the root chord to the datum line was 8° and 
when the tail was on the ground it appeared even more 
extreme. Once again, the pre-war King Kite might have 
had some influence. The argument here concerned 
landing speeds. For a perfect landing the wing should 
stall just as the wheel touches down. On many 
sailplanes the tailskid would hit the ground before the 
wing could reach the stalling angle, so they had to be 
'flown on' at a higher airspeed than was strictly desir- 
able. For relatively inexperienced pilots the minimum 
possible landing speed was required, so the Kite 2 wing 
was rigged at a suitably high angle. In normal flight this 
necessarily gave the aircraft a marked nose-down atti- 
tude which, to anyone who did not know the cause, 
made the Kite 2 appear always to be flying very fast. 
(Although hardly in a comparable field of aviation, the 
Armstrong Whitworth Whitley twin-engined bomber 
had a similar arrangement of rigging angles and like- 
wise appeared distinctly nose-down when flying 
straight and level.)
Other features of the Kite 2 were less unorthodox. 
The tail unit was virtually identical to that of the old 
Kite 1 and similarly lacking in refinement. The fuselage 
was longer, increasing the tail volume coefficients and 
hence improving stability. A landing wheel was fitted 
aft of the loaded e.g., with a nose skid. The cockpit of 
the prototype was open and had a windscreen, but a 
fully enclosed, rather angular canopy built up from 
Perspex was offered as an option. The wooden struc- 
ture throughout was of standard type. The wing, 
despite the normal D-nose plywood skinning, had 
extensive internal diagonal bracing. This was probably 
incorporated because the profile was thinner than 
usual and additional torsional stiffness was thought 
desirable. The ailerons were simple, with the open type 
of hinge line sealed merely with strips of fabric, doped 
on above and below. Such control surfaces were easily 
constructed, readily inspected and uncomplicated to 
repair, though lacking aerodynamic- elegance. The sim- 
plest type of upper-surface spoilers were incorporated. 
The rudder pedals were easily adjusted but on the 
prototype there was no elevator trimmer.
Despite its type number 26 the Kirby Kite 2 was 
designed, completed and flown at Kirbymoorside 
about a year before the Type 25 Gull 4. It was adver- 
tised that production would be under subcontract by 
Martin Hearn Ltd at Hooton Park in Cheshire.
Early in 1947 the prototype was sent on a tour of the 
British gliding clubs, to be flown and assessed. Martin 
Hearn's representatives visited the clubs with the air- 
craft, which was soon accompanied by the first off the 
production line. After a rally at the North Somerset 
Gliding Club late in March it was reported in Sailplane 
and G//V/r rthat: The Kite 2 is definitely in a class of its 
own and constitutes the ideal club soaring machine, 
salient features being the cleverly designed wing, 
robust construction and very easy ground handling 
allowed by the built-in wheel'. The two aircraft quickly 
moved on to take part in a successful rally at Ratcliffe, 
near Leicester, over Easter and early in April the proto- 
type went to the Derbyshire and Lancashire Gliding 
Club site at Camphill. Here the Kite 2 was flown by the 
club instructors, who commented quite favourably 
although their praise was a little faint. The first of the 
Olympia type had already arrived at this club from 
Elliotts of Newbury, and with perfect handling, power- 
ful airbrakes, an enclosed cockpit, an elevator trimmer 
and excellent performance it had made a very great 
impression. By comparison, the Kite 2 seemed rather 
pedestrian. It was emphasised by the salesmen that the 
Kite 2 was for club pilots and not intended to compete 
directly in the high-performance field. Nevertheless, 
unfavourable comparisons were made.
At Camphill this week was a visiting group from the 
Cambridge University Gliding club on vacation. After 
several satisfactory flights, on 10 April the prototype 
Kite 2 spun down into the trees halfway down the hill 
at the southern end of the west facing slope. It was a 
total wreck. Reporting the accident, the Cambridge 
Club scribe wrote in Sailplane and Glider:
136

--- PAGE 139 ---
TYPE 26, KITE 2
The stall and spin of this aircraft were found to be 
vicious and Bookings on his second flight had the 
misfortune to spin it in from 300ft above the ridge. 
By a miracle he escaped unhuit. Three of the new 
Elliott Olympias, owned by syndicates, were flying 
at Camphill during our visit, The Cambridge one is 
expected very shortly and reports already received 
show the Elliott Olympia is an outstanding aircraft.
The juxtaposition of paragraphs could hardly have 
been accidental. (Gordon Hookings survived to 
become a Professor of Mathematics in New Zealand, 
and did much to promote the gliding movement in that 
country.)
News of the crash spread almost instantly through 
the British gliding movement, and the prospects for 
large sales of the Kite 2 disappeared almost overnight. 
Nobody wanted an intermediate sailplane for pilots 
with small experience which could behave like that.
At the first post-war British national gliding competi- 
tion