loped the necessary sense of 
feel to manage without the rush of air all over.
The front part of the fuselage was an orthodox struc- 
ture of cross-frames and longerons skinned with birch 
plywood. Behind the wing pylon, Slingsby used a girder 
system built up on four substantial spruce longerons 
with light diagonal struts, making a completely tri- 
angulated space frame reinforced with ply 'biscuits' at 
every joint. This was covered with fabric, except for 
plywood skinning on the underside. The fuselage was 
light and relatively cheap, yet strong and easily inspected 
and repaired. There was a large landing wheel just 
behind the loaded e.g. and a rubber-sprung laminated 
ash skid ahead of it. An aero tow release hook was 
mounted in the extreme nose, but the winch launching 
hook was under the belly just ahead of the front skid 
fitting. The tailplane was strut-braced, and the rudder 
had a large aerodynamic balance ahead of the hinge line.
Like the Type 20, the T-21 was not admired by the Air 
Ministry, who did not approve of Slingsby s going 
ahead privately with this prototype, using valuable 
materials and labour during wartime. What other work 
the factory could have been doing if it were not some- 
thing of this sort is unclear, but Slingsby seems to have 
doubted his own judgement in producing the aircraft. 
Like the T-20, the T-2 IP (P for prototype) went into 
store and was almost abandoned.
It was resurrected almost accidentally. Writing about 
it many years afterwards, Dudley Hiscox, a founder 
member of the London Gliding Club, explained:
At the time the Allied armies were landing in 
Normandy [6 June 1944] the gliding instructors of ATC 
Central Command were on a course of soaring instruc- 
tion and experience at Sutton Bank. There, within the 
more or less deserted hangar of the Yorkshire Gliding 
Club, was to be seen a dismantled side-by-side two- 
seater glider obviously of recent construction. 
Whatever was it and where had it come from?
Hiscox described the aircraft accurately as 'to all 
intents and purposes a blown-up Grunau Baby'. 
Slingsby ruefully told him the story. Hiscox continued:
[When] the London Gliding Club [was] about to start 
flying again at Dunstable, I remembered that dis- 
mantled two-seater up in Yorkshire and asked 'Sling' 
to let us have the use of it to help us get started. He 
agreed to let us fetch it so long as we promised not to 
write afterwards telling him what a monstrosity he 
had produced. There was a good soaring wind on 
Dunstable Downs the day we rigged and checked 
out the 'ugly duckling'. Sling got a letter from us all 
right, but not in the tone he expected. We informed 
him in glowing terms that his big Baby was a honey; 
a splendid soarer with reasonably well-balanced 
controls and that we wanted to buy it, not borrow it. 
Even-one was delighted with the acquisition.
In this way, about April 1940 the Type 2IP (BGA No. 
675) came to Dunstable. It was flown sometimes with 
the fully exposed seats, but before long the advantages 
of having at least some fairing over the nose and some 
protection for the pilots in cold weather were recog- 
nised and the decking was left on more or less perma- 
nently. The club did not immediately go over 
completely to dual training. Two primary gliders were 
ordered in 1947, as well as another two-seater. It was 
not until October 1947 that the club reported using the 
T-2 IP regularly for student pilot training. A fatal acci- 
dent to a Dagling at the Southdown Gliding Club in 
August that year, and a similar though less serious 
crash in the same weekend at Camphill (the author 
being the injured pilot in this case), apparently con- 
vinced most clubs that traditional training methods 
should be modified. The two-seater was regarded at 
first only as a supplement to the usual routine of 
ground slides, low hops and high hops in the Dagling. 
At Dunstable Daglings remained in use throughout 
1950, with damage reported fairly often.
In July 1948 a Tutor flown by an experienced pilot of 
powered aircraft who was on a gliding course and 
attempting a 5hr soaring flight for the 'Silver C' badge, 
collided with the T-21P The Tutor lost a large part of its 
tailplane and crashed, killing the pilot, The two- 
seater's nose and wingtip were damaged, but it landed 
safely. In September 1949 the T-2 IP at Dunstable was 
involved in a second mid-air collision which was attrib- 
uted in part to the poor view from the cockpit in turns. 
The other sailplane was the famous cross-Channel 
Kirby Gull, which crashed into bushes near the foot of 
the hill, the pilot luckily surviving unharmed. The 
T-2 IP again landed safely. (The Gull was rebuilt.) 
These accidents led to a tightening up of the hill 
soaring rules at Dunstable where the skies were 
becoming crowded, and it was emphasised that the 
field of view from the two-seater was restricted. At this 
time the club had 139 members and was easily the 
largest gliding club in Britain. By the end of 1952 the T- 
2IP had flown more than l,000hr with the club.
In 1947 Slingsby produced and exhibited an improved 
design, the T-21A (BGA No. 683), which appeared, 
without competing, at the first post-war British National 
Contests held in June at the Royal Naval Air Station at 
Bramcote, near Nuneaton. It was made available for 
inspection and some trial flights. Although the fuselage 
seemed enormously wide when compared with those of 
the German Kranich and the graceful Swiss Spalinger 25 
which were in the contest, the new Slingsby design 
looked quite modern alongside the old Falcon 3, which 
was also present. Those who had a chance to fly it were 
very impressed. The large, open cockpit undoubtedly 
created a lot of drag, but most of the gliding instructors 
liked the side-by-side arrangement. They could con- 
verse easily with their pupils, observe facial expres- 
sions and see exactly what the student's hands and feet 
were doing. The T-21 did behave very like a large, sedate, 
Grunau Baby, and its performance at low speeds was 
quite adequate for training.
112

--- PAGE 115 ---
8153
Wing section 
Gottingen 535
Main fuselage 
frame
Symmetrical tip 
section
Slingsby
Type 21 C
or T - 46
Drawn by Martin Simons 1995

--- PAGE 116 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
The most important aerodynamic improvement in 
the T-21A was an increase in wingspan from 15.24m to 
nearly 16.5m (54ft). This alone gave the aircraft a better 
performance. A little dihedral was added, but otherwise 
the wing was much the same. The spoiler drive cables 
were rerouted internally \ia the fuselage pylon. There 
were considerable alterations to the fuselage. The 
depth was increased all the way from nose to tail. Where 
previously the pilots had been exposed from the chest 
upwards, even with the detachable decking in place, 
now only their heads protruded and two small yet quite 
effective windscreens were fitted. At normal flying 
speeds very little breeze was felt, although the student 
pilot's hair would be ruffled. Skids and slips in flight 
were instantly apparent as before.
There was now an instrument panel which had room 
for an altimeter, an air speed indicator, a variometer 
and, if required, a turn and slip indicator and compass. 
There were large glove compartments on either side. 
The spoiler handle was mounted centrally between the 
seats for use by either the pupil or the instructor, and the 
tow release knob was also central, just below the instru- 
ment panel. The cockpit sides were cut low enough to 
make entry and egress easy and there was room for 
parachutes. The pylon for the wing mounting was 
improved, widened slightly and given a rounded front. 
The fabric covered frame structure aft of the wing was 
similar to that of the T-2 IP, but stiffer because of the 
increased external dimensions. The rudder was rede- 
signed with a rounded tip, mainly to improve appear- 
ance. All British gliders by now were fitted with the 
Ottfur safety release. The front release was eliminated, 
as the belly hook was quite suitable for aero towing as 
well as winch launching. At the correct speed and with 
the e.g. within limits, the T-21 would climb very well on 
the winch without a hand on the controls.
The T-2IB first flew in December 1947. At first it was 
designated Type 28, but it differed only in minor details 
from the 21A and the old type number was retained 
after all. It was ordered for the ATC (after the fiasco of 
the Slingsby Type 24, which is described in the next 
chapter). The T-2 IB became the standard production 
version of the type. For the ATC it was christened the 
Sedbergh TX. Mk 1, after the well-known Yorkshire 
public school. Civil clubs usually used the original 
designation, T-2 IB but often added names which 
became quite famous. Daisy belonged to the com- 
bined Imperial College and Surrey dubs at Redhill, and 
was the first to be used for regular ab initio training. It 
was soon joined by Buttercup. Dragonfly, Butterfly 
and later Firefly flew at Dunstable, the Cambridge club 
had Bluebell, and there was even a Lady Godira at 
Coventry.
One relatively minor design defect was corrected 
after a few weeks' experience. After landing on the 
sloping ground of the Dunstable field, the London 
Club's T-2 IB rolled backwards a few feet before the 
pilots could leave the cockpit to restrain it. The eleva- 
tor had a sharp corner at the outer end which, in the 
down position, dug into the ground and shattered. All
subsequent T-2 Is had the elevator reshaped with a 
rounded corner to avoid this problem.
By January 1948 Slingsby reported that three leading 
gliding clubs, the London, the Derbyshire and 
Lancashire and the Midland, had taken delivery of the 
T-2 IB. The Midland Club, based at the Long Mynd, had 
been doing no ab initio training at all during 1947, but 
reported that dual instruction with the T-2 IB began as 
soon as it was delivered.
Production of the 2IB continued with no major 
changes to the design. The first to be exported was 
delivered to the Swedish Royal Aero Club in March 
1948. Others went to Egypt, India, Jordan, Kenya, 
Malaya, Pakistan and South Africa . The RAF and RN 
Gliding and Soaring Associations ordered the type. For 
the British gliding clubs and overseas customers 126 
were produced. In addition kits were sold, one to 
Leighton Park School for completion under skilled 
supervision by the boys. (Min, named after Minnie 
Bannister in the Goon Show, first flew in 1958.)
In 1949 tests were carried out by the Airborne 
Forces Experimental Establishment to prove that the 
Auster V was a suitable tug for the Sedbergh. It took 
ten minutes to reach a height of 2,000ft at an airspeed 
of 53kt. The ATC took a total of 7:5 Sedberghs from 
Kirbymoorside, introducing them into service in 1950, 
and a further 19 for the ATC 1 were built under licence by 
Martin Hearn Ltd at Hooton Park. The total production 
was 218. The only British sailplane before or since to 
surpass this figure was the Slingsby T-7 Cadet. Long 
after production ceased, the factory at Kirbymoorside 
was kept busy with T -21 repairs and spares.
The changeover from solo training was not immedi- 
ate throughout the land. As late as the winter of 1952 
Ann Douglas (later Welch) commented in the magazine 
Gliding that a few clubs persisted with the solo 
method. She quoted official figures which showed that 
during the first six months of that year, when both 
systems were in use side by side in the ATC gliding 
schools, the accident rate was three times as great with 
solo training. It was also shown to be much less effec- 
tive in producing pilots qualified up to the B certificate, 
or circuit flying, stage. Among the few civilian clubs 
still using solo training, two pupils had been killed. 
There were no fatal accidents with the two-seaters.
Intended from the beginning as a trainer, the T-2 IB 
was hardly regarded as a competitive cross-country 
sailplane. Despite this, three entered the 1950 National 
Competitions held at Camphill, Derbyshire, in July. 
John Furlong's Dragonfly had been there in 1949 but 
was used only for joy rides and air experience flights. 
In 1950 two Sedberghs entered the lists from the ATC 
Gliding Schools, and another came from the RAF 
Flying Training Command. The intention of the ATC 
entries was not to win the championships, but to give 
the instructors and cadets some worthwhile experi- 
ence. It was also felt desirable for the ATC to 'show the 
flag' among the civilian gliding enthusiasts. Points in 
this competition were awarded chiefly for cross- 
country flying, with a large bonus for reaching a pre-
114

--- PAGE 117 ---
TYPE 21 C orT-46
declared goal, but altitude gains were also worth some- 
thing, so there was a chance for the ATC aircraft to 
score even without leaving the site. Some of the 
launches were by the old method of rubber bungee 
from the hill top, directly into the slope lift, so any 
soaring flight was necessarily also a scoring flight. It 
was not long before the ATC crews showed they had 
not come merely to perform circuits. One of the most 
interesting flights of the meeting was that by the 
Sedbergh flown by Fit Lt Anderson and Wg Cdr Peter 
Mallett, who reached their goal at North Coates, 
Lincolnshire, a distance of 120km (75 miles). It was far 
from the longest flight of the day but it was a remark- 
ably good effort for a training two-seater.
In the 1951 Nationals, again at Camphill, the ATC 
brought three of its Sedberghs and the Imperial 
College Gliding Club entered with Daisy. This was a 
most exciting competition with many long-distance 
and goal flights, Lome Welch reaching Kent in a Weihe. 
On another occasion standing waves assisted many 
pilots on their way to the east coast, and there was a 
goal race to Dunstable. On the final Sunday, for the first 
time in a British national competition, a successful 
closed-circuit speed task was completed; out and 
return to Derby. Conditions were difficult. Philip Wills, 
in his Weihe, scraped home by the narrowest of 
margins after flying under telephone wires on the west 
facing slope of Camphill, finding a weak thermal over 
the valley and finally crossing the boundary of the field 
at a height of four or five feet to land. There was a 
moral victory for an ATC Sedbergh. George Charman 
Thomas, with a cadet in the right-hand seat, completed 
the task in 4hr, while several more famous pilots in far 
superior cross-country sailplanes did not get home.
More remarkable achievements were still to come. 
In May 1952 a Sedbergh from Detling, flown by 
Meddings and Reilly, flew 146km (91 miles) westwards 
to Chilbolton, winning the Seager Cup for two-seater 
distance flights. It became normal for the T-21B to fly 
across-country.
In the 1953 Nationals, a special trophy was offered by 
Slingsby for the most meritorious flight in a Sedbergh 
and John Furlong offered another for the Sedbergh with 
the highest total score. This 27 July Camphill meeting 
began with heavy rain, but with a partial clearance in the 
afternoon large cumulus clouds developed. Derek 
Piggott with cadet Brian Whateley declared for 
Grimsby and scratched away from the site in their 
Sedbergh. Over Sheffield they found strong lift under, 
and very soon inside, a dark cloud. Enduring bitter cold, 
heavy icing and turbulence which made the cadet sick 
and almost reduced him to unconsciousness, they 
climbed to more than 5,100m (17,000ft) a.s.L, a gain of 
4,572m (15,240ft) from the lowest previous point of the 
flight. They had no oxygen supply, but Piggott reported 
afterwards that he did not notice any problem other 
than the cold, which froze his hand to the stick. The only 
blind flying instruments were the turn-and-slip indica- 
tor* and the airspeed indicat or.
On emerging from the cloud near its top the glide to
Grimsby was easy, and Piggott could have gone much 
further but for the coast. The flight not only broke the 
National altitude record for two-seaters, but also set 
the 100km speed record for flight to a goal. The climb 
stood as a UK record until 1964, although it was broken 
before this by British pilots flying overseas. This 
Sedbergh was equipped with one of the first electrical- 
audio variometers, invented by Peter Temple. Instead 
of the traditional red and green indicators in vertical 
tubes, the instrument made clicking sounds and 
flashed lights, the rate of the clicks indicating the 
rapidity of ascent. A total-energy venturi devised by 
Frank Irving was also used. It did not ice up, which was 
surprising. One of the two barographs carried was 
equipped to record the airspeed on the chart as well as 
altitude.
Nevertheless, the main function of the type 
remained that of a basic trainer. The T-21B became and 
remained the standard, indispensable workhorse in 
British gliding clubs throughout the 1950s and well into 
the late 1960s. Its position was only gradually eroded 
by the introduction of newer types.
Belief in the importance of the open cockpit for 
training weakened as more and more early solo 
sailplanes were fully enclosed. In 1954 the Army 
Gliding Club fitted their T-21B with a neat transparent 
canopy which proved very popular. Influenced by this, 
Slingsby looked again at the design and decided it 
would be worth developing an improved model, the T- 
21C, or as it was eventually called, the T-46. The wing, 
hardly changed otherwise, was brought down to shoul- 
der level, as the roots now joined directly to the wide 
fuselage frames instead of the narrow pylon, the span 
when rigged was increased to 17.22m (56.48ft). The 
struts were retained. The view over the banked wing in 
turns was somewhat improved but the pilots' heads 
were now inside the leading edge, so the outlook later- 
ally was still not perfect. A capacious transparent 
canopy enclosed the cockpit. The tail unit was com- 
pletely redesigned, necessitating some restressing 
before a Certificate of Airworthiness could be granted. 
The T-46 flew in October 1957. Although it proved satis- 
factory it had very few advantages as a trainer over the 
original T-21. It cost more, and its performance in 
advanced flying was limited severely by its old-fash- 
ioned wing. Aerodynamically it was still a Grunau 
Baby. After the sale of the prototype no further exam- 
ples were produced. Slingsby went on to consider the 
design of a superior trainer which, a few years later, 
appeared as the Type 49 Capstan.
In 1983 the ATC announced that it would re-equip 
throughout with aircraft of glassfibre reinforced 
plastic structure. The remaining ATC wooden gliders, 
including all the surviving Sedberghs, were put up for 
sale, many in need of repair and restoration. Most wore 
bought by private syndicates, examples being sold in 
Holland, the USA, Australia and other countries as well 
as in the UK.
It became a point of pride with some of the owners to 
show what the T-21 could do. A seven-person syndicate
1 15

--- PAGE 118 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
at Husbands Bosworth achieved more than 2,000km 
(1,240 miles) total distance in their T-21, many of the 
flights being over 200km (125 miles). In 1984, the 
longest cross-country by a T-21 was flown by Lou Frank 
and Norman James from Husbands Bosworth to a 
landing in Central Park, Plymouth, a distance of 317km 
(196 miles). Flown by a solo pilot, it would qualify for a 
'Gold C' and Diamond. On 23 August 1986 the same 
pilots flew the T-21 from Husbands Bosworth to the Isle 
of Wight. A thermal over the Solent helped them across 
the water with sufficient altitude to continue soaring for 
some time before landing at Sandown. Apart from 
these, other T-2 Is have done wave flights over 3,000m 
(10,000ft) at the Long Mynd and Sutton Bank. Such 
adventures are likely to continue. There is no apparent 
limit to the age of a wooden sailplane. With proper care 
and maintenance the T-2 IB will continue in service 
indefinitely. Bluebell still flies with the Cambridge 
Gliding club, who have owned it since it was new.
A close-up of the nose of Sedbergh WB924, showing the 
cylindrical ballast housing fitted to many ATC Sedberghs to 
allow solo flying without fuss. The pitot guard is removed 
before flight. (M. Simons)
Preparing for take off in the T-21 P. The external spoiler cable 
running up the back of the strut may be seen. The nose 
bracing wire is absent. The passenger carries a microphone,
Type 21 data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o. a. 
Wing sections
Root
Tip
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
Type 2 IP
Type21B
15.24m (50ft) 
16.46m (54ft)
22.4m2* (241ft2) 24.2m2 (260.4ft2)
10.37* 
11.2
8.16m (26ft Sin) 
8.16m
Gottingen 535 modified 
Symmetrical
272kg (5981b) 
476kg (l,0471b) 
19.6kg/m2 (41b/ft2)
Performance
Best L/D (claimed) 1:21
* Figures for the T-2 IP are approximate
The original T-21 P with its truly open cockpit. Other details of 
interest are the 'Sutton' harness made of canvas webbing, 
the instructor's hand on the tow release knob, and the aero- 
tow release visible in the extreme nose. The bracing wire 
sometimes fitted from the nose to the strut fitting is not 
present. (Slingsby collection)
and the antenna sticking out of the nose indicates that this 
was a special flight for a radio feature programme broadcast 
by the BBC. (M. Eacock)
116

--- PAGE 119 ---
The instrument panel of an ex-ATC Sedbergh. The panel is 
quite typical, with, left to right, an airspeed indicator, turn- 
and-slip indicator, Cobb-Slater pellet-type variometer, and 
an altimeter. A compass was often mounted on the decking
behind the windscreen. The central knob is the tow release, 
and the spoiler control handle is on the central console 
between the pilots. Rudder pedals and control columns are 
clearly visible. (M. Simons)
Dragonfly attended the National Gliding Competitions at 
Camphill in 1949, although not competing. Here it is 
launched by bungee from the crest of the west-facing slope. 
The smoke comes from the large cement works with its 400ft 
chimney. Above the port wing the local club's T-21 is visible, 
much higher. (G. Thompson)
John Furlong's Dragonfly was loaned to the London Gliding 
Club and flew regularly there for many years until bought by 
the club. Compare the cockpit arrangement with that of the 
T-21P.(M.Eacoc/c)
Only one T-46, often called the T-21C, was built. The wing 
remained similar to that of the T-21 but was mounted on the 
fuselage at shoulder level, with a tidy enclosed canopy. The 
tail unit was also redesigned, but the improvements were not 
considered sufficient to justify series production of the type. 
(/. Tunstall)
117

--- PAGE 120 ---
The T-21P preparing for launch. The pilot in the left seat 
seems to have mixed feelings. (M. Eacock)
A rare shot of the T-21P in flight, on a winch launch at 
Dunstable. (M. Eacock)
One of the first clubs to take delivery of a T-21B was the 
Derbyshire and Lancashire Gliding Club. Their two-seater 
had blue stripes on the rudder and clear-doped fabric 
covered wings and tail, but was otherwise painted cream. It 
is soaring here over the west-facing slope at Camphill. The 
photo was taken by George Thompson from the club's 
Grunau Baby.
Imperial College Gliding Club's T-21 (Daisy) on aero-tow at 
Lasham, with contest number 40. The pitot tube carries an
'Irving' total energy venturi. The fabric-covered frame of the 
rear fuselage is well shown here. (C. E. Brown)

--- PAGE 121 ---
Sedbergh WB920 of the Empire Test Pilot's School Gliding 
Club was painted silver overall, with yellow bands around 
wings and fuselage and RAF type roundels. The pilots are 
fully equipped with oxygen breathing apparatus. (C. E. 
Brown)
Another picture of the EPTS Sedbergh on aero-tow. The 
large triangular inspection panel in the fuselage was not 
fitted to the early models of the T-21B.
Rigging a Sedbergh at Dunstable in recent times. This air­ 
craft is one of those sold by the ATC during the last few 
years. It is painted in the standard Air Cadets colour scheme, 
with serial number and roundels. (M. Simons)
Another Air Cadets Sedbergh, showing the colours applied 
to the wings. This T-21 B belongs now to a Dutch group and 
has been fitted with the steel guards ahead of the cockpit, as 
required by the Netherlands authorities. These are intended 
to protect the pilots from decapitation in the event of hitting 
telephone or power lines when outlanding. (M. Simons)
119

--- PAGE 122 ---
Flapped version
SLINGSBY
TYPE 24
FALCON 4
Wing sections, root 
and tip, NACA2R2 12
Drawn by Martin Simons 1993

--- PAGE 123 ---
Type 24, TX.8/45 
Falcon 4
The first post-war British National Gliding Contests at 
RNAS Bramcote base opened in a certain amount of 
confusion on 21 June 1947. The weather on the prac- 
tice day was not very good. The pilots and crews, 
mostly with Olympia sailplanes built by Elliotts of 
Newbury, assembled and waited for the organisation 
to sort things out. They did a little flying, but mostly 
wandered round to admire each other's sailplanes, 
special attention being devoted to the four very super- 
ior Weihes imported by devious means from the ruins 
of Germany and a beautifully-made Swiss Moswey 3. A 
couple of German Kranich two-seaters belonging to 
the Royal Naval Gliding Club were also competing. 
One of them, flown by Christopher Nicholson and 
Peter Blake, had broken the British two-seater goal 
and distance record with a flight to Bramcote from 
Yeovilton during the previous days.
Then, without prior announcement, a large yellow 
glider carrying RAF roundels arrived overhead, towed 
by an Auster. The glider's span was much larger than 
that of the tug. It released, circled the aerodrome and 
landed, looking at once very much out of place among 
the competing sailplanes. This unexpected visitor was 
the Slingsby Type 24, designed to Ministry of Aircraft 
Production Specification TX.8/45 and christened 
Falcon 4. Flown by Slingsby's chief engineer, John 
Leach, it had been towed from Kirbymoorside in two 
hours. It did not attract much admiration. No-one 
seems even to have taken a photograph. It was dragged 
away and parked in a hangar which had been reserved 
for the ATC, and it stood there for a few days alongside 
a number of Cadets TX Mk.l. Later it was towed away 
again, and as far as the civilian gliding fraternity were 
concerned that was the last ever seen of it.
After the T-21 Slingsby had intended to produce a 
new version of the pre-war Petrel, with a revised 
cockpit canopy and a few other small changes. This 
would have been the Type 22, but with the Olympia 
now available the Petrel 2, based on the old Rhonadler 
designed originally in 1932, was too slow for modern 
cross-country flying. No one ordered it and the T-22 
was never built. One T-23, an improved version of the
Kirby Kite, was produced, but also lacked sales appeal 
(see the relevant chapter). So it was that the Slingsby 
type numbers reached 24.
An advocate of two-seater training at the time said 
that what was needed was a two-seater with: 'suffi- 
ciently high-performance to allow a useful time to be 
spent airborne after release on a winch circuit even on 
a stable windless day, that can be operated within the 
financial limits of British Clubs, and is sufficiently 
simple from the instructor's point of view to allow 
instruction to be given by [the] comparatively inexperi- 
enced'. He added: The TX.8/45 was produced for the 
ATC with that end in view'.
The ATC in 1944 had not approved of either the T-20 
or the T-21, so the Ministry of Aircraft Production drew 
up an official specification. This document, dated 4 
April 1945 and emanating from the Directorate of 
Technical Development (DTD), seemed very reason- 
able at a first reading. It asked for a two-seater which 
would perform and handle in the air as much like the 
Kirby Cadet as possible. It had to be light and struc- 
turally simple though robust. The seats were to be in 
tandem, with a good view from both cockpits. Flaps 
were to be fitted to aid take-off and landing and to keep 
speed under control in rapid descents. The only instru- 
ments mentioned were an airspeed indicator and an 
altimeter. Just why the T-21 or even the T-20, which had 
tandem seats, did not meet the specification was not 
apparent, but Slingsby embarked on a new design 
which owed nothing to these existing types.
A contract was signed for three prototypes, but 
there was more in the bureaucratic mind than Slingsby 
could have reckoned with or than showed up in the 
outline specification. It was said later: The type was 
loaded up with the requirements of almost every 
department of the Royal Aircraft Establishment'. When 
detailed work began, Slingsby's team was compelled to 
delve into 'general requirements given in the following 
paragraphs of DTD 1028 (Issue No. IV) and amend- 
ment No. 1: 1.01-3.01, 3.07; 4.01-4.02, 5.01-5.02, 5.04- 
11.01 (all inclusive)'. The designers had to discover and 
comply with Chapters 203, 206, 208, 800, 801, 803, 804,
121

--- PAGE 124 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
805 and 806 of Mr Publication 970. They had to study 
Section 1 of ATN 127 (Issue II), and were to consult the 
RAE and RD (Airb) about the cables used for towing 
and to 'agree with this Department about strength 
requirements 
for 
launching 
and 
landing'. 
Airworthiness Technical Note 127 (Issue II) had to be 
complied with. Buried in the various paragraphs was a 
demand for copper binding on wingtips and rudder 
trailing edges, and an intercom system for the pilots to 
communicate with each other. Probably those who 
were consulted about the design envisaged the TX.8/45 
as nothing else than a military training aeroplane 
which lacked only one thing, an engine, to distinguish 
it from standard RAF equipment.
During discussions with the various official bodies 
some relaxations were allowed. A demand for picket- 
ing safely in a 90kt wind was eased, and the required 
maximum aero-towing speed was reduced from the 
195kph (120mph) originally demanded to 128kph 
(SOmph). There may have been other concessions.
The actual construction work was undertaken under 
sub-contract by Martin Hearn Ltd. Martin Hearn had 
been in the Avro 504 joyriding business and had gradu- 
ally established a small company at Hooton Park in 
Cheshire, near Ellesmere Port, repairing and building 
wooden aircraft. During the war the firm expanded to 
undertake repair work on Avro Ansons and sub- 
contracts for Mosquito parts. Some Slingsby Cadets 
and Tutors had been built for the ATC. It was hoped to 
continue with this kind of work, and a close relation- 
ship with Slingsby Sailplanes was established in the 
post-war period.
When the Falcon 4 with all the required equipment 
finally emerged it was a glider with a high, strut-braced 
single-spar wing of 16.56m (54ft 4in) span, about 80kg 
(1751b) heavier than either the T-20 or or the T-21 and 
costing more. The wing, of tapered planform and 
slightly swept forward to give a straight leading edge, 
was well proportioned, but the aerofoil section, NACA 
2R-12, of reflexed form, was very far from the type of 
profile normally seen on sailplanes. It was probably 
thought that the flaps would be used to improve the low- 
speed glide, but this choice of section is puzzling. It is 
unlikely to have been Slingsby s personal preference. 
The plywood-skinned flaps were large, and the fabric- 
covered ailerons also were of wide chord. The third 
prototype was fitted with simple spoilers and no flaps, 
coming out about 10kg (201b) lighter than the others.
The fuselage, with a tall pylon to carry the wing 1.7m 
(5.5ft) above the ground, had high cockpit sides, so 
footholds were necessary to allow the pilots to climb 
in. The front seat had an excellent field of view, but the 
rear pilot was well back under the leading edge of the 
wing. As usual with tandem-seated sailplanes, space 
for the rear set of rudder pedals had to be made on 
either side of the front seat, so the fuselage was 780mm 
(30in) wide at this point. Rather than having a plain 
slab-sided cross-section, the sides were slightly 
bulged, making the cockpits unusually roomy. A 
landing wheel with skid and a tailwheel were fitted in
accordance with the requirements. The tail unit was 
straightforward and the elevator had trim tabs.
The prototype, with flaps and the military serial 
VM109, flew in April 1946, almost exactly a year after the 
issuing of the specification. It was delivered in July to 
Beaulieu in Hampshire for trials by the Airborne Forces 
Experimental Establishment (AFEE). The second of 
the three aircraft, VM113, was written off in an accident 
at Wombleton in December 1946. The last, with spoil- 
ers, VM118, arrived at Beaulieu in September 1947.
It became obvious quite soon that the T-24 was not 
what the ATC had been hoping for, and advertisements 
placed by Martin Hearn in the civilian magazines drew 
no orders from the clubs. The T-24 was judged too 
costly and too heavy. It offered no advantages what- 
ever over the T-21B, and at this stage the Air Staff 
decided in future to buy their gliders 'off the shelf.
The two remaining aircraft were not immediately 
abandoned. Tests were carried out late in 1947 by the 
AFEE to determine whether the TX.8/45 would be suit- 
able for the aircraft carrier wake surveys which (as 
described in an earlier chapter) were actually done 
with the Slingsby T-20. Incidental to this investigation, 
the Auster VI aeroplane was evaluated as a tug. The 
rate of climb achieved to 600m (2,000ft) with a single 
pilot in the glider was 69m/min 
(230ft/min). 
Practicable towing airspeeds were between 45 and 
G4kt.
The T-24 project delayed the decision to use the 
Sedbergh for ATC service until 1950, so there was an 
immediate shortage of two-seat gliders. It was there- 
fore decided to carry out further performance and han- 
dling trials so that an official clearance might be issued 
for the TX.8/45 to be flown by the gliding schools. The 
AFEE at Beaulieu did the required work between May 
and December 1948, fitting in the test flights between 
other more urgent operations. Most of the flying was 
done with the spoiler-equipped VM118. The take-off 
speed was found to be 35kt. On aero-tow slight lateral 
and longitudinal instability was discovered, but this, it 
was reported, was no worse than on any other glider. 
The ailerons were unduly heavy, the forces required to 
move them being out of proportion to the other con- 
trols. The elevator trim was not effective enough to 
cover all conditions of flight on tow, especially in the 
low tow position below the tug slipstream.
In free flight the TX.8/45 was judged pleasant to fly, 
although the ailerons were still too heavy and the 
trimmer inadequate for the extreme e.g. positions. 
Stalling tests revealed no abnormalities. The aircraft 
could not be made to spin more 