om
his school's Grasshopper and took off, unfortunately 
crashing immediately on the hallowed turf of the school 
cricket pitch. According to him, in their next match the 
school bowlers made good use of the rut he had gouged. 
Some school groups broke all the rules by using a 
double bungee for launching, and hops were achieved 
in this way. Many of the fields were not large enough to 
permit even a primary glider to fly without reaching or 
flying over the boundary. To prevent serious mis- 
adventures of this type, Slingsby produced special 
spoilers which could be fitted to the leading edges of the 
wings. With these in place it was not possible for the 
Grasshopper even to hop.
From Slingsby's viewpoint the T-38 was a profitable 
exercise, and there is no doubt that many boys did 
learn a good deal not necessarily about flying from 
their exercises with these gliders. They continued in 
use for many years, and a few have survived until 
recent times to be resold on the civilian market. They 
have some nostalgic attraction, but after a very few 
flights primary gliders tend to lose their novelty and are 
derigged and stored. One, WZ791, is in the RAF 
Museum at Hendon, where it was exhibited above the 
entrance hall in 1992. According to Peter Elliott, the 
museum staff took six hours to assemble the aircraft. 
Several others exist in other museums.
Type 38 Grasshopper data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o. a. 
Wing section
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
11.8m (39ft) 
16.16m2 (174 ft2) 
8.73
6.3m(21ftl 1/2in) 
G6ttingen426
132.9kg (2931b) 
249kg (5501b) 
15.13kg/m2 (3.11b/ft2)
Grasshopper WZ761 after emerging from the factory at 
Kirbymoorside. The fabric covering of the rear fuselage bay 
was partly removed following flight tests. (Slingsby collec­ 
tion)
Grasshopper WZ754 suspended on its pendelbock at 
Bridlington School in 1976, with cadets. (P. J. V. Elliott, RAF 
Museum, Hendon, RefPO19499)

--- PAGE 173 ---
WZ754 at Bridlington, apparently just airborne. The bungee 
crew stand in the background (P. J. V. Elliott, RAF Museum, 
Mention, RefPOl9498)
Grasshopper WZ791 on display at the RAF Museum, 
Hendon, in 1992. Although basically a very simple aircraft, 
rigging a primary glider correctly was not straightforward 
because the cables had to be correctly tensioned to ensure 
that the wings and tail unit were accurately aligned. To get 
this aircraft into position for display occupied the museum 
staff for 6 hours. (M. Simons)
The pilot's seat and controls of the Grasshopper at Hendon. 
The Ottfur release hook at the extreme nose, the ballast 
boxes and the rubber ring skid suspension are also shown. 
(M. Simons)
171

--- PAGE 174 ---
Prototype
Modified 
tail skid
NACA 63 620
3
Main production 
canopy
Skylark 2 S
Slingsby
Tip section 
NACA 4415
Type 41
Skylark 2
Drawn by Martin Simons 1992

--- PAGE 175 ---
Type 41, Skylark 2
The Skylark 2 was envisaged as a straightforward 
development of the original Skylark, Slingsby's Type 
37, and when design work began in 1953 it was 
described as the T-37B. It was soon apparent that an 
entirely new design was emerging, and the type 
number 41 was allocated. (The T-39, an unpiloted 
target glider, and T-40, a powered racing aeroplane, 
were never built.) The new Skylark inherited very little 
from the Skylark 1 except the general concept of a 
three-piece wing and the low-density gaboon plywood 
used for the skins. The value of the NACA '6 series' 
aerofoil sections had been widely recognised by this 
time, but the T-41 used the 20 per cent thick NACA 63.3 
620 profile instead of the 18 per cent thick section of 
the T-37. The wingtip section was also changed. 
Slingsby had been advised that the low-drag profiles 
did not work well at low Reynolds numbers (associ- 
ated with narrow wing chords at low airspeeds), and 
reverted to the older NACA 4415 with 3° of aero- 
dynamic washout to prevent tip stalling.
A most important innovation was the use of glass- 
fibre reinforced plastics (GRP). As long ago as 1944, in 
articles for the magazine Sailplane and Glider, W. R. 
Scott had suggested that the era of the all-plastic air- 
craft was approaching. He described various different 
types and uses of plastics and mentioned impregnated 
wood, paper and cloth materials, although the possibil- 
ity of using glass fabric as a structural material had not 
yet been considered. In the late 1940s, asbestos fibre 
reinforced plastic materials were used by F. G. Miles's 
Company in the construction of a prototype wing for 
the Kendall K1 two-seat sailplane. Neither the material 
nor, after six years' work, the K 1 design, proved 
successful.
When glass-plastic composite materials became 
readily available, Slingsby was quick to see their poten- 
tial. Polyester rather than epoxy resins were used at 
this stage, and there was not yet enough confidence for 
the new materials to be used for any of the load bearing 
structure, but it was expected that experience in man- 
ufacture and service would lead to their more wide- 
spread adoption. The Skylark 2 had a large proportion
of its fuselage skin ahead of the wing moulded in one 
piece, and the wing and tail unit tips and some small 
fairings were made of the same material. Such three- 
dimensionally curved parts of sailplanes had previ- 
ously been built up by scarfing together large numbers 
of small pieces of plywood. The GRP moulding tech- 
nique saved a great deal of time in production and gave 
a much more accurate and stable surface. The 
Kirbymoorside factory was thus in the forefront of new 
developments in both aerodynamic design and materi- 
als of construction.
The general opinion of the British pilots who had 
flown the T-37 was that it was somewhat too fast for 
British conditions, with a higher wing loading and 
hence higher stalling speed and larger turning circle 
than required for British thermals. The span of the T-41 
was increased to 14.63m (48ft), slightly short of the the 
15m which was likely to become the limit for the pro- 
posed new Standard Class for contest sailplanes, and 
the aspect ratio was reduced to 16. Despite the lower 
aspect ratio the new type would be more satisfactory 
at low airspeeds. With a better fuselage of semi-mono- 
coque construction, as usual for high-performance 
sailplanes, the parasitic drag would be reduced, so the 
T-41 would represent a considerable advance on the 
original Skylark.
The choice of the 20 per cent thick wing section was 
guided by study of drag curves from the NACA wind 
tunnels. These showed that while thick profiles had 
somewhat higher minimum drag than thin sections at 
the ideal angle of attack, the thick sections had a very 
broad range of low drag values. Colloquially, the 'drag 
bucket' of the thick sections on the wind tunnel charts 
was wider, although slightly shallower. The best lift-to- 
drag ratio, or L/D, commonly used as an index of aero- 
dynamic efficiency, is of less importance in soaring 
than might be expected. A sailplane on a cross-country 
flight is normally flying slowly, circling to gain height in 
a thermal, or gliding straight at high airspeed to make 
distance and reach the next upcurrent with minimum 
loss of height and time. There is little re;ison ever to fly 
at the theoretically ideal minimal drag speed corro
173

--- PAGE 176 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
spending to the maximum L/D ratio. By using a thick, 
low-drag section with a wide drag bucket, the Skylark 
2 would have a slightly poorer maximum L/D figure 
than some other sailplanes, but it would climb better 
and cross the gaps between thermals faster.
All the advantages of the low-drag sections would be 
lost if the wing surface was not accurate in service, and 
for this reason the thick, low-density gaboon plywood 
which proved successful on the T -37 was used again 
for the Skylark 2, with the same kind of accurately 
machined spruce leading edge and carefully smoothed 
joints. The ply skin of the wing centre section was 
carried right over the mainspar to the rear auxiliary 
spar, before which the laminar boundary layer would 
have made its transition to turbulence. Behind this, the 
wing was fabric covered. Subsequent research, includ- 
ing measurements of the profile drag of the centre 
section in flight, showed that the Skylark wing profile 
did achieve the anticipated low-drag figures.
On the outer panels of the wing, which tapered to the 
'turbulent flow' tip section, some weight was saved by 
covering with fabric alone behind the mainspar. The 
ailerons, plywood skinned to ensure adequate stiff- 
ness, were mass balanced. A rather large piece of lead 
on a steel arm was bolted to the aileron spar but wholly 
concealed inside the wing. The aileron hinges of the 
Skylark 2 were very simple and mounted flush with the 
top skin of the wing, instead of the more usual centre- 
mounted hinge with elaborate fairing of the gap. The 
Skylark hinge line was easily sealed with tape, and on 
the underside the gap that opened when the aileron 
was raised provided some drag which helped to 
counteract adverse yaw. This arrangement was one of 
the outcomes of the research on lateral controls that 
had been done with the T-37. Airbrakes of the 
Schempp-Hirth type were fitted.
The centre section of the wing was made almost the 
same span as the length of the fuselage with rudder, so 
the two main components of the aircraft could be 
housed in the trailer side-by-side. This had the dis- 
advantage of making the centre section rather heavy, but 
the T-41 was not a very large aircraft and the weight was 
not unreasonable. To rig the Skylark, the fuselage was 
held upright as the centre section was lowered bodily 
into pc >sition. Two long steel pins, one on each side, were 
then inserted from the front to join the front and rear fit- 
tings to the fuselage main frames. Controls were linked 
through a central hatch in the wing. The tip panels, 
j< >ined when rigging with a single vertical steel pin, were 
much shorter and lighter. Connection to the ailerons was 
very simple, the drive mechanism being entirely within 
the centre section, with a short pushrod to the aileron 
horn at the extreme inner end of the control surface.
The fuselage was a simple streamlined form of oval 
cross-section, skinned with gaboon plywood aft of the 
glass-plastic nose. The wing was mounted on a low 
pylon which faired into the cockpit canopy in front. 
Behind the trailing edge, the line of the wing profile was 
continued down to fair neatly into the rear fuselage. The 
cockpit was large and comfortable, with a fairly upright
seating position and a small blown bubble transparent 
canopy. There was a simple landing wheel with skid. By 
now, the importance of stability for sailplanes which 
were to be flown blind in cloud had been well recog- 
nised. The Skylark 2 had a long rear fuselage and large 
tail surfaces of rather angular appearance which 
ensured safe handling characteristics.
The first flight of the new sailplane was made in 
November 1953, about eight months after that of the 
Skylark 1. Test flights by EGA Test Group No 1, based 
at Lasham, showed everything normal, though Ann 
Welch had some interesting moments when flying at an 
extremely far aft e.g. position, the Skylark taking five 
full turns to come out of a spin after initiation of the 
recovery procedure. With a normal e.g. there were no 
problems.
It was at once apparent that the new sailplane was 
going to be a very successful and safe aircraft with 
good performance and that, when the International 
Standard Class rules had been settled, the Skylark 2 
would be a contender in the World Championships for 
this category. The new class rules were framed around 
the old Olympia 2B with a span limitation of 15m, a 
wheel and effective airbrakes as leading requirements, 
and elaborations such as flaps and ballast tanks were 
not allowed. Slingsby's order books filled rapidly, and 
the Skylark 2 entered full-scale production. It was 
ordered by clubs and private groups, a number were 
exported and a few were built from kits, including two 
in New Zealand. The total produced was 63, more than 
any previous Slingsby high-performance sailplane. In 
production, the original small cockpit bubble was 
replaced by a much larger canopy which made the 
cockpit more comfortable and the view better, but did 
not improve the airflow over the wing.
In July 1955, Derek Piggott in a Skylark 2 made a 
climb in a thunderstorm over Lasham which broke the 
British gain of height record. The only gyro instrument 
fitted was a turn and slip indicator. There was no 
oxygen breathing equipment. The Skylark was struck 
several times by lightning and there was damage from 
hailstones. When he essayed to leave the cloud and 
descend with airbrakes open, Piggott was carried up 
and reached almost 7,500m (25,000ft) above sea level 
before emerging from the cloud. He was very lucky to 
survive with the aircraft still intact and himself still 
conscious, though in a strange condition because of 
repeated shocks and lack of oxygen.
In the 1958 World Championships, held at Leszno in 
Poland, Philip Wills flew a Skylark 2 in the Standard 
Class. He was placed 13th out of 24 competitors, which 
was disappointing, but he insisted that the aircraft 
could not be blamed. What was probably more impor- 
tant was that, in the inaugural design competition for 
the Standard Class, the Skylark 2 did not win. The 
sailplane that took the design award was the Ka 6BR, 
designed by Rudolf Kaiser of Germany. Although Wills 
believed that the Skylark had a bet t er performance, the 
Ka 6 was cheaper and lighter. Within a few years the 
total number of Ka 6s and variants produced exceeded
1 74

--- PAGE 177 ---
TYPE 41,SKYLARK 2
700. By 1961 the Skylark 2 was no longer in production, 
and Slingsby admitted in print that it was, after all, sur- 
passed in performance by the Ka 6.
The Skylark 2 was the basis for some experiments 
intended to improve its performance. A group at the 
Bristol Gliding Club set out to clean up the design in 
detail, reducing the angle of incidence of the wing to 
cut parasitic drag at high speeds, improving the wing- 
to-fuselage junction, fairing the wheel and making 
other changes, all of which combined to make a 
measurable improvement. The author rebuilt a Skylark 
2 during 1965-7. The aircraft was the one used by 
Piggott for his thunderstorm climb, which, some ten 
years later, had been almost written off in an accident 
at Husbands Bosworth. During the reconstruction 
work, marks from the lightning strikes and hail were 
discovered in several places. The span was extended 
to the full 15m with slightly upswept Horner wingtips 
to reduce vortex drag, and the wing section was mod- 
ified at the leading edge in accordance with research 
and advice from Dr F. X. Wortmann of Stuttgart 
University. The main fuselage frames were cut down in 
height by about 150mm, and the wing incidence 
reduced. The cockpit was redesigned to allow a semi- 
reclining seat and a Skylark 4 transparent canopy was 
adapted. These changes did produce a slight improve- 
ment in performance, and the aircraft, which still flies 
regularly, is now known as the Skylark 2S.
Type 41 Skylark 2 data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a. 
Wing sections
Root
Mid-span
Tip
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
14.63m (48ft)
13.4nr (144.3 ft2)
16
7.315m (24ft)
NACA633 620 
NACA633 620 
NACA4415
209kg (4611b) 
308kg (6791b) 
23kg/m2 (4.7151b/ft2)
Skylark 2 over Lasham during tests by the BGA Test Group 
No. 1. (Charles E. Brown, RAF Museum Hendon, neg No. 
6605-4)
Fred Slingsby with the prototype Skylark 2 under construc­ 
tion. The small cockpit canopy, thick wing section and the 
aileron pushrod at the outer end of the centre section are 
visible. Slingsby himself is pressing the remote control 
button of the camera in this picture. (F. N. Slingsbtf

--- PAGE 178 ---
The prototype Skylark 2 being flown over Lasham by Ann 
Welch. (Charles E. Brown, RAF Museum, Hendon, neg No. 
PO 35029)
The Skylark 2 in Western Australia. This aircraft was No 41 
on the Gliding Federation of Australia register. (F Hamilton)
Philip Wills in the cockpit of the Skylark 2 at Lasham, with his 
daughter. (Charles E. Brown, RAF Museum, Hendon, neg 
No. PO 35018)

--- PAGE 179 ---
The production version of the Skylark 2, with much-enlarged 
cockpit canopy. (Charles E. Brown, RAF Museum, Hendon, 
negNo. 6831-8)
In recent times, the Skylark 2 continues to give good service. 
This example, with a modified cockpit canopy, participated in 
a vintage glider rally at Camphill in Derbyshire in 1987. 
(M. Simons)
M. Simons with the rebuilt and modified Skylark 2S at 
Dunstable in 1987, 20 years after the rebuilding was com­ 
pleted. The emblem, designed by Elizabeth Hargreaves, 
represents a phoenix rising from the flames. Unkind persons 
described it as an exploding chicken.
177

--- PAGE 180 ---
Prototype 
wing
Root section 
NACA633 618
Tip section 
NACA4412
Slingsby
Type 42
Eagle
Drawn by Martin Simons 1993

--- PAGE 181 ---
Type 42 Eagle 
and T-55 Regal
Many useful training two-seat gliders and sailplanes 
had been built and flown after the Margarete emerged 
from the Darmstadt Akaflieg in 1923. Its modern 
counterparts were the Slingsby T-21 and T-31. High- 
performance two-seaters were rarer, but a few had 
appeared, notably the German Kranich, which had 
been built in large numbers and a few of which sur- 
vived the Second World War. In post-war Britain there 
was a recognised need for a two-seat sailplane with 
sufficient performance to give instruction in cross- 
country flying. The EGA in 1947 organised a two-seat 
sailplane design competition which produced several 
very promising projects on paper. The winner was 
Hugh Kendall's K1. This was eventually built and flown 
in 1954, but many late changes were made, including 
shortening the fuselage and replacing the orthodox tail 
unit with a V tail. The prototype was found to be 
extremely dangerous in spins, and the K 1 was aban- 
doned after many attempts to rectify the trouble. The 
remains were eventually burned at Dunstable in the 
late 1960s. Slingsby did not enter the EGA competition. 
He might have submitted an improved version of his 
Gull 2, which would probably have done very well.
Following the success of the T-34 Sky single-seater 
there was a project for a two-seat version which would 
have been the T-36. Some work was done on this in 
1952. When the advantages of the NACA low-drag 
'laminar flow' wing profiles were realised, a new 
approach was adopted and the outcome in 1953 was 
the T-42. Details were announced in the spring of 1954 
and the prototype flew in June of that year. The name 
was chosen by Hulton's, proprietors of the children's 
comic paper Eagle, who sponsored the entry of the air- 
craft in the World Championships at Camphill.
A major problem with two-seat sailplanes is that, if 
the seats are side-by-side, the fuselage is unduly broad, 
which increases drag. Furthermore, such an aircraft 
cannot be flown solo without the addition of ballast to 
keep the e.g. forward. With tandem seating the fuse- 
lage can be made narrower and the rear pilot can be 
seated on, or very close to, the point of balance, so 
that, if the rear seat is empty, the e.g. remains
unchanged. With a normal wing layout the rear cockpit 
has to be located either above, below or within the 
wing root. The pilot's vision is then severely restricted. 
Every possible solution to this problem had been tried 
in the past. Like many earlier types the T-31 trainer had 
the wing mounted high enough to dear the pilot's head, 
so the view down was excellent, but in turns the 
banked wing prevented any outlook to the inside of the 
turn. This was dangerous for a sailplane in thermals, 
when other sailplanes were likely to be in the way. The 
Kranich and the American Schweizer TG-2 had the 
pilot's head emerging from the centre of the wing, 
which gave a good view into turns, but there was no 
view down. The Short Nimbus of 1946 had the second 
pilot's seat on the main wing spar of a low wing mount- 
ing, which gave excellent visibility but produced an 
unduly deep fuselage and increased the drag almost as 
much as a side-by-side arrangement would have done.
The USSR's world record breaking 
KIM 
3 
Stakhanovetz had shown the best solution, which was 
to give the wings pronounced forward sweep. This 
creates some difficulties in design and construction, 
but if these are overcome the result is very satisfactory. 
Many modern two-seaters, such as the Janus, the Ka 13 
and Twin Astir, use forward sweep together with a 
shoulder or mid-wing position. The Eagle wing had 
tandem seating and the high mounted wing was swept 
forward. There was also a substantial cut-out in the 
leading edge at the junction with the fuselage. The only 
reason for these features was to improve the view from 
the rear cockpit.
Following the Skylark 1 and 2, the Eagle used the 
NACA six-digit wing profiles tapering to an ordinary 
four-digit profile at the tip, with 3° of washout to 
control any tip stalling tendencies. Also like the 
Skylark, the wing was built in three pieces, the outer 
panels being connected to the centre section with a 
single vertical steel pin with automatic engagement of 
very simple front and rear fittings. There vvus a 
straightforward pushrod connection for the aileron 
drive. The centre section, with no dihedral, carried the 
large Schempp-Hirth-type airbrakes. The outer wing
179

--- PAGE 182 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
panel mainspars were swept forward enough to 
produce a straight leading edge at 90° to the centre 
line, and were set at a slight dihedral angle. A heavy 
mainspar of I cross-section with spruce flanges and 
plywood webs took the bending and shear loads. 
Accurately made wooden ribs were glued fore and aft. 
Ahead of the spar the wing was skinned with low- 
density gaboon plywood to resist torsion and preserve 
accurate contours. The skin was carried back to the 
auxiliaiy spar except for the outer wing panels, which 
were fabric covered. The mass-balanced ailerons were 
also skinned with plywood.
The Eagle's fuselage was a built-up wooden space 
frame of rectangular cross-section, covered mostly 
with fabric but with a rounded turtledeck behind the 
wing. This type of structure, similar to that of the 
Skylark 1 and T-21, was light and easily built and 
repaired although it lacked in aerodynamic refinement. 
The seats were arranged as close together as possible, 
and the rear set of rudder pedals were on either side of 
the front seat, suitably enclosed. The fuselage was 
widened by about 190mm to make this possible. The 
cockpit canopy was in two sections, the front portion 
hinged on the right side, the rear portion hinging to 
open upwards and backwards. The large, angular tail 
unit was of orthodox wooden construct ion, the eleva- 
tor and rudder being fabric covered and the fixed sur- 
faces skinned with gaboon plywood. Glass reinforced 
plastic mouldings were used for the nose cap and 
decking around the cockpits, for the parachute boxes 
and internal cockpit lining, and for small fairings else- 
where. There was still no attempt to use glass for any 
stressed components.
In something of a rush, the Eagle was made ready for 
the 1954 World Championships at Camphill. During 
their practice flying for this event, Ann and Lome 
Welch used it to break the British two-seater distance 
record with a 248km (154-mile) flight from Lasham to 
Great Yarmouth, but it was already apparent that the T- 
42's performance was not coming fully up to expecta- 
tions, and the rear cockpit was very uncomfortable for 
long flights. The seating position was such that the 
pilot sat bolt upright, even having to lean forward 
slightly. In the contest, which was affected by bad 
weather so that only four contest days were achieved, 
the T-42 finished seventh out of nine two-seat entries. 
The winner was the very refined Yugoslavian Kosava.
The Eagle prototype came into prominence on 14 
May 1954, when it was used by Lome Welch and Frank 
living to make the first crossing of the Channel by a 
two-seat sailplane. The flight began just after 11 a.m. 
with an aero-towed launch from Lasham. After a strug- 
gle for the first hour, progress improved and a climb 
was made to 2.400m (8,000ft) near the coast, the 
sailplane emerging from cloud with slight icing immedi- 
ately above Dover at about 1.40 p.m. The glide across to 
France was uneventful, and sufficient height remained 
to continue soaring. The Eagle passed over Brussels at 
840m (2.800ft) and continued in weakening conditions, 
to land in a field near Louvain at 4.20 p.m. Frank living,
whose duties during the flight had been chiefly those of 
navigation and record keeping, had been so uncomfort- 
able in the rear seat that he was almost unable to stand 
upright for some time after the landing. The distance 
covered was 402km (250 miles). The British two-seat 
distance record had been broken again, and this was 
only the fourth soaring flight across the Channel.
The prototype Eagle continued in service as a club 
glider at Lasham. Derek Piggott flew it solo in the 1957 
National Championships, and in June 1958 it collided 
in cloud with a Sky. The pilots of the Eagle saved them- 
selves by parachute, the glider falling in the garden of a 
house in Lasham village just after a tea party had 
ended. The Sky lost about 4m (13ft) of one wing, but 
the pilot was able to retain control and make a safe 
landing on the aerodrome.
Meanwhile, Slingsby had been working. The obvious 
cause of the prototype's disappointing performance 
was the leading-edge cut-out, and the T-42A or Eagle 2 
had a much simplified wing with a straight leading 
edge. This improved the airflow considerably. The 
slight penalty in terms of pilot view was accepted. The 
rear seat was redesigned for greater comfort, the 
centre section was shortened to lighten it for rigging, 
the tips were lengthened to make up the difference and 
the brakes were moved outwards.
In 1956 the World Gliding Championships were held 
at St Yan in France, this being the last occasion on 
which two-seaters were counted as a separate class. In 
the usual last-minute rush before a major competition, 
test flights showed that the controls of the T-42 A were 
not light but they were effective, giving an adequate 
rate of roll and good harmony between stick and 
rudder in turns. The stability in pitch was such that 
some pilots found it excessive, but in a machine 
intended for cloud flying this was reckoned to be a 
good fault. The pilots for the Internationals, Nick 
Goodhart and Frank Foster, did not have a chance to 
fly the aircraft until they arrived in France.
Compared with the very sleek two-seaters which 
were entered from other countries the T-42 was con- 
sidered rather ugly, and various uncomplimentary 
nicknames, 'mahogany bomber', 'sardine tin' and 'soap 
box', were applied. Nick Goodhart and Frank Foster 
astonished everyone by winning after six contest days 
with a substantial lead. It was pointed out that, despite 
appearances, the Eagle had a good performance, was 
not too costly and had many practical advantages 
including ease of rigging, de-rigging and repair.
The T-42B or Eagle 3 used the same wing and tail unit 
but the airbrakes were enlarged by 10 per cent. A 
marked change of trim when the brakes were opened 
was cured by adding a second elevator trim tab 
coupled to the brakes so that it moved with them to 
cancel the trim change. The cockpits were still further 
improved by lengthening the nose 15cm. In this form 
the T-42B entered production in 1957. The first cus- 
tomer was Peter Scott, the famous naturalist, who 
used what he christened his Sen Eaalfj for many excel- 
lent flights, including those for his 'Gold C' badge in
180

--- PAGE 183 ---
TYPE 42, EAGLE
1958. Seventeen T-42Bs were built, Most remained in 
Britain, but three were exported to New Zealand and 
one to Germany.
A final variation was the T-55 Eagle 4, or Regal Eagle, 
which was a modification of a standard Eagle 3 done 
by Slingsby in 1957. This had the centre section 
extended to give a total span of 20m (65.6ft). It was 
used by Wally Kahn and John Williamson to break the 
two-seat goal flight record with a flight from Odiham 
(towed there from Lasham) to Perranporth in 
Cornwall, a distance of 312km (193 miles).
The prototype Eagle wing under construction, showing the 
marked cut-out in the leading edge at the centre. (Slingsby 
collection)
Type 42 Eagle data 
Dimensions
Prototypes Eagle 1 & 2
Wingspan 
17.86m (58.5ft) 
Wing area 
2 1.4m2 (230 ft-) 
Aspect ratio 
14.6 
Length o.a. 
8.3m (27.25ft)
Eagle 3
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a. 
Wing sections
Root
Mid-span
Tip
17.73m (58.2ft)
22.3nr(24()ft-)
14.8
8.5m (27.9ft)
NACA (>:*., 618
NACA63.618 
NACA4412
372kg (8201b) 
562kg (l,2401b) 
26.4kg/m-(5.41b/ft2)
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
The original Eagle in flight over Lasham. Various attempts 
were made to improve the airflow over the centre-section. In 
this case there appears to be a small turbulator behind the 
cockpit. (Charles E. Brown, RAF Museum, Hendon, neg No. 
6605-10)
Another view of the first Eagle in flight. The turbulator is just 
visible. The emblem on the front of the fuselage came from 
the owners and sponsors of the aircraft, the Eagle children's 
paper which was popular at the time. (Charles E. Brown, 
RAF Museum, Hendon, neg No. 6605-13)
**%
181

--- PAGE 184 ---
Ann and Lome Welch with the Eagle on a typically gloomy 
day at the 1954 World Championships, held at Camphill in 
Derbyshire. (Charles E. Brown, RAF Museum, Hendon, neg 
No. 6568-13)
The Eagle 3, much-improved in performance by redesign of 
the wing. The centre-section cut-out was gone, slightly spoil­ 
ing the view from the rear seat. (Slingsby collection)
An Eagle 3 at Lasham. The airbrakes were now part of the 
outer wing, instead of being in the centre section. A fixed trim 
tab on the port aileron indicates that this particular aircraft 
had a 'one wing low' tendency, probably after repairs.
182

--- PAGE 185 ---
The prototype Eagle 3 at the Kirbymoorside factory. 
(Slingsby collection)
The cockpits of the Eagle 3. The feet of the rear pilot, on the 
rudder pedals, were on either side of the front seat, necessi­ 
tating a wider fuselage. (Slingsby collection)
Eagle ZK-GBD in New Zealand. (P. Layne)

--- PAGE 186 ---
7620
I
t- - -
—
_ _
1 —— J-
r ~ ~
\
——— -^X
"~"J^^l~— — ——
. —— — —
— — —I — — "
00
486-|
•380*~380-|-380*|-380
<380~|-380-|-380~|~390*|~g4-——1032
I 
' 
! 
I f\i I
---T t--
.---, UL-
63 620
3
Tip 
MAC A 4415
Skylark 3 F
co
Cvl
Slingsby 
Type 43 
Skylark 3
530
Drawn by Martin Simons 1993

--- PAGE 187 ---
Type 43, Skylark 3
The future of the Slingsby Sailplanes Company was in 
some doubt after the death in April 1955 of J. E. D. 
Shaw, who, with Fred Slingsby, had founded and sup­ 
ported the company in its early days and was its chair­ 
man. His large majority holding of shares had to be 
sold to defray death duties on his estate and one 
prospective buyer, an aircraft manufacturer in search 
of more business, planned to close the Kirbymoorside 
factory and move its operations to the south of 
England. To prevent this, Philip Wills, chairman of the 
EGA, set about forming the Shaw Slingsby Trust to 
take over the company. There were delays and legal 
problems, and the threat of eventual closure was not 
entirely removed.
Operations in Yorkshire continued, and the 
company was about to achieve its greatest successes. 
For a few years from 1955 the Type 43, Skylark 3, 
achieved the kind of prominence that Fred Slingsby 
must often have dreamed about in the preceding 
decades. Two sailplane designs dominated this period. 
In the Standard Class, limited to a 15m wingspan, the 
Ka 6CR from Germany was outstanding. More of this 
type were built than any other high-performance 
sailplane before or since. In the unrestricted or 'open' 
class the Skylark 3 became the recognised leader, 
though the number produced in total never reached 
anything like the figures for the Ka 6.
The Skylark 3 first flew in July 1955. It was basically 
a simple aircraft, a straightforward development of the 
successful T-41 Skylark 2, of orthodox structure and 
sold at a relatively low price. It was not, like most of its 
immediate international competitors, an expensive 
'orchid'. The same materials were used as for its 
smaller stablemate; spruce spars, longerons, ribs and 
frames, and low-density gaboon plywood for the 
stressed skins and glass-polyester resin mouldings for 
the unstressed front fuselage shell, wingtips and fair­ 
ings. Skylarks 2 and 3 were in production at the same 
time in the foe lory, many of their components being 
identical.
The most important aerodynamic change was an 
increase of wingspan from a little under 15m to just
over 18m, with a consequent improvement in aspect 
ratio to 20.5. This was a high figure for a wooden 
sailplane. Even the remarkable Meteor, a very 
advanced all-metal prototype from Yugoslavia which 
flew in the same year, did not quite achieve this figure. 
Increasing the aspect ratio of a wing is the most impor­ 
tant means available of reducing wingtip vortex drag. 
At low airspeeds, as when a sailplane is circling in a 
thermal, vortex drag is normally more than half the 
total drag of the entire aircraft, so any saving here can 
make a very large improvement in soaring per­ 
formance. Providing the aspect ratio is high, the 
inevitable increase in structure weight can be toler­ 
ated. A high wing loading is desirable in any case for 
efficient flight at the other end of the airspeed scale, for 
penetrating areas of sinking air during the search for 
more thermals, so the fact that the Skylark 3 without 
the pilot tipped the scales at 253kg (55lib) did not 
count against it, except when it came to ground han­ 
dling, rigging and de-rigging.
To increase the span of a good small sailplane is 
therefore the most obvious way to improve its per­ 
formance, but such an exercise is not without difficul­ 
ties. The stresses in the wing, especially near the root 
end, increase very greatly and the mainspars have to be 
much stronger. The three-piece wing of the Skylark 
simplified the spar design because there was no need 
for costly metal fittings in the centre. The fuselage 
could be hung on the wing by the simplest method. The 
two main cross-frames in the fuselage carried four fit­ 
tings corresponding with those on the wing spars. Two 
long steels rods, inserted from the front and passing 
through the front fittings to engage the rear ones as 
well, united the wing and fuselage. The airbrakes, suit­ 
ably enlarged, were built into the c