e USA, after these comparisons and after 
flying the aircraft himself, expressed disappointment 
with the detail and profile accuracy. The Dart is a 
beauty as long as you stand far enough away to miss 
the amateur paint job and the protruding ribs,' he 
wrote. He admired the handling and comfort. Of the 
15m version he remarked that it was probably a little 
better than the Ka 6CR, which was very faint praise. 
The Ka 6E was by now on the market, itself already a 
little better than the Ka 6CR.
Making the wheel fully retractable allowed the Dart 
17R to take a safe attitude on the ground with the wing 
incidence reduced by 5°. The nose skid was not neces­ 
sary and was removed. The high speed glide was 
better. A retracting wheel was also fitted to some Dart 
15s. At a late stage in the production an all-metal 
tailplane was introduced. The final version of the Dart 
was thus a composite of wood, metal and glass, but the 
most important component, the mainplane, was 
skinned with plywood over ribs in the old tradition.
Of the Standard (lass version of the Dart, 30 were 
built at the factory and another five from kits, four of 
these in New Zealand. Forty-four Dart 17Rs were built 
by Slingsby, and two more from kits in New Zealand. 
Production ended early in 1967.
It had to be faced. The Dart 17R was not as good, 
even in British weather, as the rival SHK. But by the 
end of 1966 the SHK, too, was beginning to look old- 
fashioned.
It was very apparent that the type of wooden struc­ 
ture hitherto employed at Slingsby was now inade­ 
quate for high-performance sailplanes, and the NACA 
six-digit wing profiles were also super-seded. The
214

--- PAGE 217 ---
TYPE 51 , DART 1 5 & 1 7R
required accuracy of wing surface for new sections 
coming from the university researchers could not be 
achieved with wood, and a bump where the skin 
passed over the mainspar.
In Germany and Switzerland, glass/plastic tech­ 
niques were well established. The aeroelastic prob­ 
lems that had beset the early prototypes had been 
solved or were well on the way to solution. 
Messerschmitt-Bolkow were selling their Phoebus, 
Eugen and Ursula Hanle established Glasfliigel and 
produced the H 301 Libelle and engineers from Zurich 
University co-operated with Hanle and Rudolf Kaiser 
to produce the Diamant. Klaus Holighaus, one of the 
students responsible for the D - 36 yii tn.m ijtttyel, joined 
the Schempp-Hirth Company in 1965, Gerhard Waibel 
went to Schleichers and Wolf Lemke joined the 
Rolladen-Schneider Company.
The final Dart development came in 1968. F. X. 
Wortmann in Stuttgart, pursuing rather different lines 
of theoretical argument from Eppler, had produced a 
range of new wing profiles that, given a wave-free wing 
surface, could yield considerable advantages. For the 
1968 World Championships, to be held at Leszno in 
Poland, Slingsby undertook to build two Standard 
Class Darts using these new profiles. The general out­ 
lines of what the team pilots thought they needed were 
sketched informally at a conference with Bill Slater. 
These ideas included a new cockpit canopy with a fully 
faired nose instead of the slightly less efficient stepped 
form, and air for ventilation ducted from intakes 
beneath the wing root. Slater, it seems, took the rough 
sketches to the factory for production with little 
further draughting work being done on them.
There was a considerable rush to get the two new 
sailplanes ready, along with two HP 14C all-metal 
sailplanes for the Open Class contest, and the team 
went to Poland with inadequate time for preparation. 
The results were disappointing. The Dart 15W flown by 
John Williamson came 22nd in the Standard Class 
Championships. Williamson was greatly frustrated 
when he was joined in a thermal by the Swedish pilot 
Persson flying one of the new all-glass H 201 Standard 
Libelles. It out-climbed the Dart 15W with ease, and in 
the glides also left him far behind. Persson finished in 
second place. Towards the end of the competition 
Williamson escaped death by a fraction when, caught 
by a violent windshear from nearby storms, he was 
forced into a dangerous downwind landing and hit 
some hidden steel wires. One of the wires sliced 
through the cockpit canopy and cut deeply into the 
headrest, but he somehow escaped injury. The Dart 
was repaired overnight and flew in the contest next day.
Afterwards, Frank living wrote of these special air­ 
craft:
They were, in fact, sawn down Dart 17Rs with a fixed 
wheel picking up on the attachments intended for 
retracting undercarriages. In the event the promised 
performance gain at low speeds did not seem to have 
been out irely achieved and they were just outclassed.
The long canopies also looked surprisingly bulky 
compared with those of the opposition . . . bodging 
front fuselage lines doesn't work.'
Subsequently these two special aircraft were con­ 
verted to 17m span, but they never made a great 
impression. The one Williamson flew still exists. (The 
owners never replaced the headrest.)
Dart production tapered off in 1967. About the only 
thing that seemed clear was that traditional wooden 
sailplane construction had a very limited future. The 
reconstructed Slingsby Aircraft Company faced 
serious problems.
Type 51 Dart data
Dart 15
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a. 
Wing sections
Root
Tip
15m (49.21ft) 
12.5m2 (12.63ft2) 
18(17.8) 
7.47m (24.51ft)
NACA 64.^618 
NACA64,615
Weights (wooden spar, original wing) 
Tare 
242.6kg (5351b) 
Flying 
331.1kg(7301b) 
Wing loading 
26.48kg/m2 (5.421b/ft2)
Weights (metal spar)
Tare 
222kg (4901b)
Flying 
331kg (7501b)
Wing loading 
26.21kg/m2 (5.371b/ft2)
Dart 17 R
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a.
17m (55.77ft)
13.87m2 (149.3ft2)
20.4
7.54m (24.6ft)
Wing sections as Dart 15
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
Dart 15 W
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a. 
Wing sections:
Root
Tip
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
225.9kg (4801b) 
340kg (7501b) 
22.8kg/nr (4.671b/ft2)
15m (49.21ft)
12.63m2 (135.89ft2 )
17.8
7.47m (24.51ft)
Wortmann FX 61-180 
Wortmann FX 61-163
250.7kg (5551b) 
381kg (84()lb) 
3.05kg/m2 (6.251b/ft2)
215

--- PAGE 218 ---
The Dart 17 in which Nick Goodhart competed in the 1965 
World Championships at South Cerney. The wheel was not 
retractable, and the wing incidence relative to the fuselage 
was high. The rudder was subsequently enlarged. (Charles 
E. Brown, RAF Museum, Hendon, neg No 6874-4)
The Dart 15 flown by George Burton in the 1964 British 
National Championships. The original wing planform is 
shown. Behind the Dart is the Olympia 460B prototype 
(Contest No. 54), which was produced by Elliotts in competi­ 
tion with the Dart as a Standard Class sailplane. (G. Bailey- 
Woods)

--- PAGE 219 ---
A Dart 15 about to take a winch launch at Dunstable in 1965. 
The wheel is now faired. (M. Simons)
Nick Goodhart in the Dart 17 at the British Nationals in 1966. 
Note the small ground clearance, necessitating a high angle 
of incidence for the wing. Behind the Dart 17 is Peter Scott's 
EON Olympia 419X. (M. Simons)
A Dart 17R with the author and wife, crew chief, preparing for 
aero-tow launch at Dunstable in 1967. Note the greatly 
improved ground clearance, allowing a lower angle of inci­ 
dence. (E. A. Hull)

--- PAGE 220 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
The Dart prototype soon after its public debut in red and 
white colour scheme. The main wheel was not faired. 
(Slingsby collection)
The tail unit of the Dart 15, showing the anti-balance tab on 
the all-moving tailplane. The wheel being ahead of the e.g. 
made lifting the tail of the empty aircraft for ground handling 
quite difficult. The T-shaped lifting handle was removed 
before flight. (G. Bailey-Woods)
The wing rigging system of the Dart. Two steel pins, aligned 
on the same centre, attach each wing to the fuselage 
frames. A fifth pin then joins the upper flanges of the main 
spars. (M. Simons)

--- PAGE 221 ---
TYPE 51, DART 1 5 & 17R
A Dart 17R at Dunstable. A beauty providing you stand a little 
distance off, wrote George Moffat unkindly. (M. Simons)
Construction of the Dart 15 at the factory. Note the templates 
used to check the ribs for accuracy, and the very heavy twin 
spruce spar on this early production aircraft. (Slingsby 
collection)
Traditional methods were no longer good enough. The 
plywood wing skin of the Dart, grain laid diagonally, was held 
to the ribs and spar during gluing by the old method of 
tacking strips. (Slingsby collection)

--- PAGE 222 ---
7700
,200 
J200 
200
Aerofoil section 
Wortmann 
FX61 -184
T-53C 
tail unit
Slingsby 
Type 53 
Phoenix
Drawn by Martin Simons 1994

--- PAGE 223 ---
Type 53, Phoenix
It was apparent after the 1965 World Soaring 
Championships that high-performance sailplanes built 
in wood had reached their limit. Glass-reinforced 
epoxy resin aircraft were entering production in 
Germany and Switzerland, and their performance 
advantages were quite evident.
In Britain many competent aeronautical engineers 
still distrusted GRP. There were doubts about stiffness, 
maintenance and repair, the likely effects of weather, 
and fatigue. There had been bad experiences with 
some of the earlier composite materials, such as those 
proposed for the Kendall K 1 two-seater which was to 
have been built by the Miles Aircraft Company. The 
experimental laminations had seemed very promising, 
but deteriorated chemically over a period and disin­ 
tegrated. The new GRP wings flexed alarmingly in 
flight, and most of the early glass sailplanes had flutter 
problems. There were worries about temperature 
control for curing epoxy resins if repairs had to be 
done in ordinary, draughty club workshops, and 
doubts were expressed about the effects of high tem­ 
peratures in tropical and semi-tropical countries. (A 
Swiss Diamant sailplane imported to Australia in 1968 
had a thermometer built into the main wing spar near 
the root to allow the pilot to check before take-off that 
the structure was not beginning to soften in the sun.)
It did not take long for everyone to realise that all of 
these problems were soluble, but it was far from clear 
at first that GRP was the way ahead. The sad thing is 
that no real advantage had been taken of the experi­ 
ence gained at Slingsby during the years immediately 
after the introduct ion of glass-polyester moulded sub­ 
components on the Skylark 2 in 1953. Even a very 
modest research programme started at this time would 
have found the company in a much stronger and better- 
informed position ten years later. In Germany most of 
the development work was done not by vast organisa­ 
tions with huge financial resources, but by tiny groups 
of enthusiastic students in academic flying groups 
attached to technical universities. They were provided 
with workshop facilities and advice by their colleges, 
but had to seek financial support elsewhere or manage
with none. In Britain nobody did anything at all along 
these lines at the crucial time.
There was ample experience in the aircraft industry 
with metal. Stiffness and resistance to weathering, 
maintenance and repair techniques were all well 
understood. Aluminium alloy sailplanes had long been 
customary in the USA. The Schweizer Aircraft 
Company had been building metal gliders since the late 
1930s, and there were homebuilders all over that 
country using metal. As late as August 1969 Schweizers 
still argued that metal construction of sailplanes was 
preferable, not perhaps in terms of outright per­ 
formance, but in economy of labour, unit cost for small 
production runs and other factors. It was stated that 
Schweizers produced a metal sailplane of modest per­ 
formance in about 500 man-hours. The labour required 
for a glass sailplane was three times greater.
Some comparative flying of the Dart against the 
world-record-breaking metal Sisu, designed and built 
in limited numbers by Leonard Niemi, suggested that a 
metal wing skin suitably filled and smoothed could be 
sufficiently free from waviness. With a simple struc­ 
ture the assembly of a metal aircraft was demonstrably 
easier than that of a wooden one, once the jigging and 
tooling had been set up. The necessary techniques 
were not hard to learn. In 1966 Slingsby Aircraft Ltd 
made the decision to change over to metal.
The accumulated woodworking skills among the 
local labour force would not be wasted. Older aircraft 
would often come back to the factory for repairs. Sales 
of some training types such as the T-45 Swallow and T- 
49 Capstan were expected to continue, and the Dart 
would remain in production for a while. In the spring of 
1966 Slingsby's only serious rival in Britain, Elliotts of 
Newbury, gave up sailplane manufacture and con­ 
cluded an agreement which saw all servicing, spares 
and any future manufacturing rights of the EON 
Olympia 463 sailplanes (of mainly wooden structure) 
handed over to Kirbymoorside. There were prospects 
for licence production of light wooden aircraft such as 
the Tipsy Nipper and replica aircraft for the film indus­ 
try. The powered version of the Capstan, the T-49C,
221

--- PAGE 224 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
was also being tested and might prove popular.
No doubt the decision was also influenced by pre­ 
paratory discussions which led to the Sigma project, 
which was started early in 1966. A group of dis­ 
tinguished British engineers and sailplane pilots 
formed a small company to design and build a world- 
beating sailplane, aiming to have it ready for the World 
Championships in about 1968 or 70. It was intended to 
bring to bear all available knowledge in the one air­ 
craft, hence the name Sigma, the Greek letter signify­ 
ing the total sum in mathematics. The Sigma group 
were thinking of extremely large span (by the stan­ 
dards of the time) and a very high aspect ratio wing 
with large and complicated area- and camber-changing 
flaps. Glass plastic materials seemed out of the ques­ 
tion, and metal was the only alternative. It was agreed 
that the design work and construction would be done 
in space leased by the company at Kirbymoorside, 
although Sigma was not a Slingsby project.
At about the same time, Slingsby undertook under 
contract the construction of a gigantic aerial advertis­ 
ing hoarding known as the Cameo V-Liner. This was an 
enormous, though very light, girder-like space frame 
built up from sub-components rather like a huge 
Meccano set in fabricated aluminium alloy tubing, with 
a tandem arrangement of lifting surfaces, multiple 
power units and a control cabin. It was meant to carry 
advertising signs over the skies of Los Angeles and 
other American cities, a role hitherto reserved for air­ 
ships.
John Sellars joined the company as chief engineer in 
1966. The first sailplane study he made for the 
company was the 7-52, a proposed 14.()3m (48ft) span 
two-seater with tandem seating, intended for the ATC 
to replace the old fleet of T-;U Cadet Mk. 3 and T-21 
Sedbergh two-seaters. The T-52 was not built, but the 
design was developed and enlarged to become the T- 
53, which flew as a prototype in March 1967. Some 
wind tunnel testing of a one-tenth scale model was 
done at Imperial College in London. Much depended 
on official approval of the design for the Cadets. It was 
hoped to sell the type to civilian clubs too, but a bulk 
order from ATC' was the main hope.
The T-53 had a span of 16.76m (55ft) and a swept- 
forward cantilever wing of constant chord with flaps 
and airbrakes. The wing profile was one of the rela­ 
tively new Wortmann sections, FX 61-184. The struc­ 
ture was kept as simple as possible, with pressed alloy 
ribs, a substantial mainspar and a light rear spar carry­ 
ing the flaps and ailerons. The whole was metal 
skinned. Flush rivets were used to preserve the laminar 
boundary layer as far as possible over the forward parts 
of the uing, but round-headed rivets and ordinary pop 
rivets were used elsewhere. The airbrakes were housed 
in separate boxes above and below the wing, pre­ 
venting leakage of air through from the lower surface to 
the upper, a common fault with previous sailplanes, 
even when the brakes were fully closed.
The fuselage, of oval cross-section, was relatively 
short with the two-seats in tandem. The skins were
pop-riveted to the frames. The transparent canopy was 
moulded in two sections, fore and aft, but fitted to a 
one-piece frame which was lifted off as a whole to 
allow the pilots into and out of the cockpit. The field of 
vision from both seats was good, the forward sweep 
allowing the rear pilot to be seated close to the e.g. in 
flight but entirely ahead of the wing root. Behind the 
cockpit, the fairing over the centre section of the wing 
was also transparent, further improving the view. A 
two-wheeled tandem main undercarriage was used, 
the main wheel being sprung. With the crew in the 
cockpit the nose went down on to the front wheel, and 
it was easy to hold the aircraft straight during the early, 
slow phases of launching before full rudder control 
was available. With the seats empty the centre of 
balance was behind the main wheel, so the aircraft 
rested on its tailskid. A T-tail unit layout was used, 
taking the tailplane out of the wing wake and keeping it 
well clear of the ground, where it was not vulnerable to 
damage in rough landing fields. The tailplane was of 
orthodox type, with a hinged elevator. There was no 
dorsal fin extension on this prototype. Glassfibre rein­ 
forced plastic mouldings were used for the nose cap, 
the wing and tailplane tips and some fairings.
The new aircraft, known subsequently as the T-53A, 
first flew on 3 March 1967 in bare metal finish. At this 
time John Sellars left to work for the Sigma group, and 
his place as Slingsby s chief engineer was taken by Pat 
Monk, who also left soon to go to New Zealand and was 
replaced by James S. Tucker.
The ATC were very interested in the new two-seater, 
and about August 1967 a provisional contract for 40 air­ 
craft was placed, subject to some alterations and a 
revised specification. The new requirements included 
provision for flying the aircraft with open cockpits, 
which required an alternative canopy arrangement with 
windscreens. On test this proved quite satisfactory. 
Directional stability was actually improved because of 
the reduction of fuselage side area forward of the wing, 
but a demonstration flight in a sudden snowstorm 
caused the ATC 1 officer concerned to recommend dele­ 
tion of the open cockpit requirement. It was also sup­ 
posed at first that, to fit in with ATC operations, the T-53 
would often be flown with the airbrakes locked in a 
partly open position. This would reduce the per­ 
formance, and hence the time in the air from each winch 
launch, to a level comparable with the Cadets Marks 1 
and 2 still used by the ATC for solo flights. Camber- 
changing flaps would not be needed. It was pointed out 
at the time that such a specification, including open 
cockpits, could have been more easily met if the ATC 1 
had simply reordered the Slingsby T-31 Cadet Mk. 3. It 
was also envisaged that, to save time between launches 
at the gliding schools, the T-53 would be retrieved after 
each flight by being towed or pushed backwards over 
the ground. This necessitated a tail wheel.
Construction of a second prototype was begun. The 
structure was further simplified by deleting the flaps. 
The nose was lengthened to increase the range of pilot 
weights allowed in the front cockpit, and to satisfy the
222

--- PAGE 225 ---
TYPE 53, PHOENIX
ATC the nosewheel was temporarily replaced by a 
small skid. A spring trim, rather than a trim tab, was 
fitted to save weight and complication, and there were 
other minor changes. The T-53B flew first at the end of 
March 1968, a full year after the original prototype. 
After initial flight trials a small dorsal fin was added to 
improve the directional stability, which was not good.
The company was very busy with other projects: the 
V-Liner, half-a-dozen replica S.E. 5A biplanes for 
filming, and the construction under licence of the HP 
14 metal sailplane designed in the USA by Dick 
Schreder, and a Slingsby derivative of it, the HP 140.
It was remarked soon after the T-53B had been flown 
and exhibited that, while it was not beautiful, it had a 
look of purpose and character. The handling character­ 
istics were adequate and safe, but no one ever 
described them as very pleasant. The constant-chord 
wing and forward sweep combined with the rather 
short rear fuselage resulted in considerable adverse 
yaw when banking to initiate a turn. Firm use of the 
rudder in co-ordination with the ailerons was very nec­ 
essary. Twenty or even ten years previously this would 
have drawn little criticism, since almost all of the older 
gliders had similar feel, but modern sailplanes, includ­ 
ing those from the Slingsby factory, had led pilots to 
expect something much better. The rate of roll was 
good for a two-seater, but the ailerons were heavy at 
maximum deflection. The stall was docile and lateral 
control was retained throughout. Spinning behaviour 
was normal and recovery, even after five full turns was 
very quick. A good performance was claimed, the best 
glide ratio being stated as 29:1. This was probably opti­ 
mistic, but whatever the true figure it was more than 
satisfactory for a training aircraft. In weak thermals 
with two pilots aboard, the T-53B did not climb well, 
although it made good progress at high speeds to pene­ 
trate sinking air. Flown solo from the front seat it 
soared very much better.
The T-53B prototype was painted in Service colours 
with roundels and fin flashes, the obligatory yellow 
bands and the words 'AIR CADETS' in black capitals 
on the front fuselage. It left the factory in May 1968 for 
evaluation by the ATC, bearing the military serial XV 
951.
Production began. The civil version was equipped 
again with the nose-wheel undercarriage, and the tail- 
wheel became standard. Only one was bought by an 
English gliding club at this time, but Reading 
University engaged in meteorological research, also 
bought a T-53B and equipped it with special instru­ 
mentation. The rest of this early batch were exported, 
several going to the USA, two to New Zealand for the 
Air Cadet League there, and others singly to Australia, 
Switzerland and Israel. Soon after its arrival in 
Australia, the T-53B w/n 1686 was found to be seriously 
out of trim, the tailplane being set some 5° from its 
correct incidence and requiring full forward stick to 
prevent a dangerous nose-up pitch. How this occurred 
was never explained, but after correction at 
Schneider's factory the aircraft was satisfactory.
Then disaster struck at Ings Lane. In the early 
morning of Monday 18 November 1968, after the 
weekend and long before any workers arrived, the air­ 
craft factory, including the assembly, fitting and 
machining shops, the stores and the planning depart­ 
ment, was destroyed by fire. The Piper Tri-Pacer 
belonging to Jack Bradley, his private yacht and other 
costly items of property which had been parked in the 
factory during the previous week, were destroyed. The 
partly-built Sigma prototype and nearly all records and 
plans of this project were lost. (The Sigma was later 
completed and flown elsewhere.) The V-Liner was 
destroyed, never to be heard of again, and so were 
several other aircraft of various types, complete or 
under- construction or repair, including four T-53Bs. 
Two partly completed T-53s were saved, but all of the 
production jigs and tools were destroyed.
The cause of the fire could not be established. The 
Slingsby Aircraft Company as an entity never1 fully 
recovered, although immense efforts were made to 
rebuild. The two surviving T-53Bs were used to aid 
reconstruction of the jigs and tooling, and these two 
aircraft were then completed and sold. Production of 
new aircraft began again slowly, with some sales at 
home and a few exports. The name adopted for the 
type was appropriately Phoenix, after the bird that 
rose from the ashes, but this nomenclature never 
seems to have caught on.
The ATC called for further modifications, and a T- 
53C was envisaged to accommodate these, but the 
expected bulk order never came. The first T-53B 
remained in use at two ATC gliding centres, and was 
taken by the Ministry of Technology for a time in 1969- 
70, for Service acceptance trials at Boscombe Down, 
before being returned to the ATC. It was badly 
damaged and struck off charge in 1972, although parts 
were salvaged (see below). The original T-53A was 
never registered and was scrapped in 1969. Altogether 
18 T-53Bs were completed by Slingsby. Some of them 
went into store in the post-fire months to be sold 
several years later.
Some defects were discovered in service. The 
tailplane incidence was increased by nearly 2° on all 
aircraft, perhaps influenced by reports from Australia 
and following extensive flight tests at the factory. 
Modifications were required to the steel tube centre- 
section, where cracks developed in some aircraft.
Some work was done on the T-53C proposal. The 
most important change was reduced forward wing 
sweep, a new mainspar design and centre-section 
structure, and an increased all-up flying weight, Other 
changes included the addition of servo-tabs to the aile­ 
rons and a fin and rudder extension attached above the 
tailplane, with deletion of the dorsal fin extension. 
Some refinements in the cockpit included moulded 
glassfibre seats and an improved instrument panel and 
trimmer system. No complete T-53C to the new design 
was ever built, but a T-53B, works number 1721, was 
taken off the production line and modified to produce 
an interim type as a demonstrator. The wing was not
223

--- PAGE 226 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
altered except for the aileron tabs. Development went 
no further at Kirbymoorside. Subsequently, w/n 1718 
was similarly modified and test-flown before sale.
By 1969 the Slingsby Aircraft Division was in severe 
financial difficulties. Bradley, the managing director, 
facing some legal problems, had resigned, and there 
were many staff redundancies. The entire Bradley 
group of companies was placed in receivership in July 
1969. For a period of several months all aircraft pro­ 
duction ceased.
The story of the T-53 does not quite end at this point. 
Yorkshire Sailplanes Ltd, a small company based near 
Ripon which had hitherto been engaged in glider repair 
and maintenance and trading in sailplanes, was able in 
1972 to buy the design from the revived Slingsby 
company, together with the tooling and jigs. The 
interim T-53C demonstrator, w/n 1721, was taken over 
as part of the deal and became the prototype of what 
was subsequently announced as the YS-53 Sovereign. 
This aircraft with some modifications, including 
removal of the dorsal fin strake, made its initial test 
flight on 10 February 1973. It was re-registered.
Another YS-53 was constructed partly from the 
wreckage of the prototype T-53B, ex-ATC. Only the 
belly of the fuselage was useable. New wings were 
built, solid-riveted throughout except for the aft lower 
wing skin, where no internal access was possible to 
back up the rivet setting process. Other modifications 
were introduced, including a change to the aileron 
gearing. This aircraft, which flew in July 1973, was the 
first true YS-53. One more was nearly completed when 
Yorkshire Sailplanes in their turn went into receiver­ 
ship. The third, incomplete, Sovereign went to 
Slingsby in settlement of a debt. It was finished pri­ 
vately under contract by Geoff Bailey-Woods, flown by 
him at Wombleton in June 1974, and sold.
A few T-53s survive, though not many are still flying. 
In the USA Michael Eacock almost singlehandedly 
rebuilt a damaged T-53B, incorporating all the mod­ 
ifications which had been introduced in the interim T- 
53C demonstrator. The single Australian example 
remains in regular use in Queensland and is popular
with some pilots there. It is used to give inexperienced 
solo pilots the feel of an older type of aircraft with 
somewhat idiosyncratic controls. Several in the USA 
have been restored and are flying. One of the two that 
were sold in New Zealand survives, and after passing 
through several hands is once again operating with 
cadets. In Britain at the time of writing only one sur­ 
vives in airworthy condition, w/n 1718, which was 
modified to the interim T-53C standard. Several others 
are still extant and capable of restoration or repair.
Type 53 data 
T-53 A
Dimensions 
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a. 
Wing sections
Root
Tip
16.76m (55ft) 
ia95m2 (204ft2) 
152 
7.62m (25ft)
WoitmannFX61-184 
WortmannFX61-184
Camber Flaps 5° up, 15° down.
Weights 
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
T-53B
Dimensions 
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Length o.a.
362kg (798lb) 
544kg (l,200b) 
28.75kg/m2 (5.98lb/ft2)
16.91m (55.5ft)
19.02m2 (194ft2)
159
7.80m (25.6ft)
Wing sections as for T-53 A; no flaps.
Weights 
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
353kg (78Gb) 
526kg (1,160b) 
29.3kg/m2 (6lb/ft2)
The T-53A prototype after completion at the Slingsby factory. 
The aircraft, after test flying, was stored, eventually being 
scrapped in 1969. (N. Ellison)
The T-53A prototype about to be launched for its first flight, 
with Geoff Bailey-Woods in the front cockpit. (G. Bailey- 
Woods)

--- PAGE 227 ---
The T-53A airborne on the first flight over the Vale of 
Pickering in Yorkshire. (G. Bailey-Woods)
The American T-53B/C taking a winch launch. (M. Eacock)
The interim T-53B/C demonstrator soon after completion of 
the alterations. The dorsal fin remains at this stage. Servo- 
tabs on the ailerons are just visible. ( Vickers-Slingsby via G. 
Bailey-Woods)
Two examples of the T-53B were exported to New Zealand, 
registered ZK-GFQ and 'GFW. 'GFQ, seen here in smart 
livery, is still in service with Air League cadets. (R Bums)
The first T-53B, XV951, in Air Cadet livery, showing the nose 
skid instead of the wheel. This aircraft remained in service 
for several years but was scrapped after a very heavy 
landing atCranwell in 1972. (N. Ellison)

--- PAGE 228 ---
Tne I-53B was said to 'have a look of purpose and charac­ 
ter'. An American author unkindly remarked, in the magazine 
Soaring, that 'one gets the impression that a ghastly mistake 
has been made at the Boeing factory. The ship looks like a 
small Boeing 727 that has been assembled with the wings 
on backwards.' (M. Simons)
One of very few T-53Bs still in regular service. Completed 
before the factory fire, this aircraft was displayed at the 
Farnborough Air Show in 1968, and soon afterwards was 
exported to Western Australia, where it was flying early in 
1969 registered as VH-GUB. It is now operated in 
Queensland by the Boonah Gliding Club. (M. Simons)
In the USA, several T-53Bs are still in existence, although 
not all are flying. This example, N1578, was one of the earli­ 
est batch, built in 1968. It has been damaged many times, 
extensively repaired and partly rebuilt. Finished now in imita­ 
tion of British colours, it flies in Wyoming with new owners. 
(D. Carswell)
The T-53B cockpits gave an exceptionally good field of view 
to the instructor in the rear seat. (M. Simons)

--- PAGE 229 ---
The prototype Yorkshire Sailplanes YS-53 Sovereign at 
Dishforth. (N. Ellison)
AT-53B was taken off the production line for modification to 
produce a demonstrator for the proposed T-53C. The verti­ 
cal tail was increased in height. The small dorsal fin 
remained on this prototype. (N. Ellison)
Michael Eacock in New England almost single-handedly 
restored this T-53B and incorporated the modifications to 
transform it to the T-53 interim C standard. (M. Eacock)
Yorkshire Sailplanes YS-53, number 2, built using some 
parts from the ex ATC T-53B. G. Bailey-Woods is in the front 
seat. (G. Bailey-Woods)

--- PAGE 230 ---
615-i,.,- ^635
Schreder 
tail
Shngsby 
tail
Root section 
Wortmann 
FX61 -163 
(modified)
Schreder 
tail, projected
HP14C
Tip detail 
Scale x 3
Aileron mass 
balance
Tip section
Wortmann
FX61 
163 (modified)
Tip rubbing 
plate
Slingsby
Schreder
HP-14
Drawn by Martin Simons 1994

--- PAGE 231 ---
Slingsby Schreder
HP-14
In 1966 Richard Schreder won the US National Soaring 
Championships at Reno, Nevada, in his new sailplane, 
the all-metal HP-14. Schreder had designed and built 
light powered aircraft at Bryan, Ohio, before he com­ 
peted in his first US National Soaring Championships 
in 1956, flying a Schweizer 1-23D. By the next year he 
had built and was flying his own design of sailplane, the 
HP-7, and he was soon rated one of the top ten pilots in 
the USA. With his HP-8 he won the Nationals at Bishop, 
California, in 1958, and in the following year broke 
three world records for speed round triangular 
courses. As a member of the US team at the 1960 World 
Championships, held near Cologne, he landed the HP-8 
on the eastern side of what was then the Iron Curtain. 
He spent a night in jail, but was not ill-treated and 
rejoined the competition a day later. New sailplane 
designs now began to emerge from Schreder's small 
factory at the rate of about one per year, each an 
improvement on the last. The HP-9, HP-10, HP-11 and 
HP-11A appeared, kits for home constructors being 
marketed under the liberal American regulations for 
amateur building of aircraft. A British writer said: 'For 
simplicity and effectiveness, Dick Schreder's HP-12 is 
the most superbly engineered aircraft that I have ever 
seen'. The HP-13 followed. Another commentator 
remarked on the American's ability 'to knock up a 
superb metal glider in no time at all, or, more precisely, 
in six months or a year.... The whole process shows a 
degree of initiative which we might well emulate in the
UK:
Advanced details of the HP-14 were published in 
Sailplane and Gliding in December 1965. It was said 
that several American amateurs had started construc­ 
tion from kits supplied by Schreder even before he 
himself had flown the prototype. The anticipated best 
glide ratio was claimed as over 40:1, compared with the 
36:1 of the 17m Slingsby Dart (still in production) and 
38:1 of the German SHK. Schreder's 1966 US Nationals 
result with the HP-14 was added confirmation of the 
excellence of his design. Handling was good, the air­ 
craft having no serious vices, although the ailerons 
were less effective than desirable because of stretch­
ing in the cable-driven controls. A significant point in 
British eyes was that the HP-14 had been designed with 
a larger wingspan and lower wing loading than 
Schreder's previous sailplanes. He said he now recog­ 
nised that competitions were won or lost not on the 
best days, when everyone did well, but on the 
'scratchy' days of weak thermals when the h