ese more expensive 
aircraft, and was strut-braced, Schneider followed the 
fashion. Such wings were not too hard to build, and 
were more efficient than the plain rectangular form 
preferred for primary gliders. The profile, Gottingen 
535, well tested in Prandtl's wind tunnel and proved in 
practice on earlier types, extended unchanged from 
the wing root to the inner end of the ailerons. From 
there the section changed progressively to a thin sym- 
metrical form. To prevent tip stalling, negative twist, or 
washout, was introduced. Viewed from the rear, the 
trailing edge swept upwards gradually towards the tip, 
the laminated wood trailing edge member being 
curved in two dimensions. The ailerons required 
careful jigging during assembly, but this was the only
31

--- PAGE 34 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
complicating feature of an otherwise simple wing. A 
small amount of dihedral was built in, because all of 
the taper in thickness was on the underside.
The monospar wing structure also followed the lead 
set by the most efficient sailplanes. Baltic pine was 
used for the spar flanges, with plywood shear webbing 
between. The entire leading edge was covered with 
birch plywood glued to the ribs and directly to the 
upper and lower flanges of the spar to form a complete 
tube of D cross-section. Sub-ribs ahead of the spar pro- 
vided additional stiffening for this stressed skin, which 
resisted all the torsional loads. Aft of the mainspar the 
unsupported wing ribs of the centre section could 
sometimes distort under the tension of doped fabric 
covering. To stiffen them laterally, linen tapes were 
woven, criss-cross fashion, between the rib booms.
The simple wooden struts allowed the wing to be 
light and simple yet strong. l Tp and down loads were 
transferred by the struts to the base of the main fuse- 
lage cross frame, so there was no need to carry 
massive bending stresses through the wing root itself, 
which would have required a greatly reinforced 
mainspar and elaborate steel fittings at the junction. 
The attachments to the top of the main fuselage frames 
were simple steel pins, one at the mainspar position, 
one near the leading edge and one at the end of the 
short rear diagonal spar. All of the pins, including those 
holding the struts, were prevented from sliding out by 
plain washers and safety pins. In 1931 the need for 
spoilers or airbrakes for sailplanes had not been real- 
ised, and the first Grunau Baby had none.
The Baby's fuselage was of hexagonal cross section, 
and comprised a series of light cross-frames linked by 
six longerons with a plywood skin forming a box. The 
cockpit was open, lacking any kind of enclosing 
canopy or windscreen. At this time it was considered 
most undesirable for the sailplane pilot to be shielded 
from the airflow. Airspeed indicators were rarely fitted, 
so much had to be judged by the feel of the wind on the 
pilot's face. Little attention was given to comfort. The 
seating position was bolt upright and the seat itself no 
more than a flat board.
The landing gear, as usual for the period, was a 
rubber-sprung skid, laminated in ash. An open hook for 
bungee launching was mounted on the front skid fitting. 
The front skid attachment, a single bolt through the keel 
longeron, proved a source of weakness which persisted 
through all the later versions of the type. A landing with 
drift could be relied on to split the skid at the front and 
bend the attachment bolt or even tear it out of the longe- 
ron, necessitating a tricky splicing job on this curved 
member. Later, when winch and aero towed launches 
were more common, it was easy to fit the Grunau Baby 
with a more sophisticated tow release.
The tailplane, fabric covered and with internal diago- 
nal bracing, was held on to the rear fuselage frames by 
two vertical bolts and braced with simple steel tubular 
struts. A minimal fin and sternpost provided the attach- 
ment for the aerodynamic-ally balanced rudder. All of 
the controls were operated by stranded steel cables
running over pulleys, except for the steel torque tube 
under the pilot's seat and two vertical pushrods in the 
fuselage to drive the aileron bellcranks.
Soon after the prototype was completed in 1931 Wolf 
Hirth, already famous among the gliding community 
and recently returned from some extraordinary 
soaring flights in the USA, came to Grunau to manage 
the training school. (Among his pupils was to be a girl 
from Hirschberg called Hanna Reitsch.) Schneider 
showed Hirth the new Baby. Not foreseeing the mis- 
understanding this was to cause, he obtained permis- 
sion to use Hirth's name in support of his sales 
campaign. Although the glider had been completed 
before he saw it, many subsequent reports wrongly 
credited Hirth with the design, despite the fact that he 
was in the USA when Schneider was building the 
prototype. The association nevertheless did a good 
deal for the Grunau factory.
The Grunau Baby proved popular, and before long 
several were being turned out every week for sale to 
clubs all over Germany. Six were entered for the 1932 
Rhon competition, at which one of Schneider's other 
more ambitious sailplanes suffered structural failure 
in flight, killing the pilot. Realising that he needed more 
help with stressing, Schneider persuaded Emile Rolle, 
a qualified aircraft engineer, to work for the firm.
Rolle undertook a substantial redesign of the 
(irunau Baby, improving and strengthening it in every 
respect. The result was the Baby 2, which emerged 
early in 1933. The span was increased to 13.5m 
(44.28ft). The fuselage, which previously had a straight 
back, was given a down-sweeping curve which 
improved the airflow over the tail, and the tall, angular 
rudder was reduced in height.
The cockpit of the Grunau Baby 1 was never 
comfortable, and Rolle did little to improve it. Yet on 3 
April 1933 Kurt Schmidt took off in a new Grunau Baby 
2 over the East Prussian sand dunes. The stiff breeze 
sweeping in from the Baltic provided continuous slope 
lift all day, all night and into the next day. Schmidt 
remained airborne for a new world duration soaring 
record of 36hr 36min. Such an event made headline 
news in those days, and the pilot and his aircraft 
achieved immediate fame. The order book at Grunau 
remained full for the next decade.
As a club sailplane the Baby handled well and safely, 
and it was robust enough to perform simple aerobatics 
and to withstand occasional heavy landings. It per- 
formed quite well enough for inexperienced pilots to 
attempt their first cross-country thermal soaring, and 
in the following years many used the Grunau Baby to 
complete the Silver C badge tests, which had been 
introduced in 1930: a duration flight of 5hr, a soaring 
ascent of 1,000m (3,280ft) and a cross-country distance 
of 50km (30 miles). The 5hr flight was about as much as 
most pilots could stand in a Baby, even with ample 
cushions. Admiration for Schmidt's duration record 
increased as the years went by.
In England, Louis Desoutter, a member of the 
London Gliding Club now established at Dunstable,
32

--- PAGE 35 ---
TYPE 5, THE GRUNAU BABY 2
began building a Grunau Baby 1 in 1932. In June 1934 
Desoutter was fatally injured in an accident to a 
Dagling primary glider (a flying wire broke) before 
completing the project, and the Baby was finished by 
Slingsby in Yorkshire. This was probably Fred 
Slingsby's first chance to study the design closely, 
though at least one imported Baby 2 was already flying 
in Britain at this time. Desoutter's Baby was returned 
to Dunstable to make its first flights as a club sailplane 
there on 30 December 1934. Its success was immedi- 
ate, especially since Desoutter, a superb craftsman, 
had used ball bearings in place of plain pulleys in the 
control circuits, making the aircraft extremely pleas- 
ant to fly. The London Club asked Slingsby to supply 
another Grunau Baby and an order also came from 
Alan Cobham, who incorporated some gliding in his 
National Aviation Day displays. Slingsby negotiated a 
licence from Schneider, and production of the Grunau 
Baby 2 began at Kirbymoorside immediately.
Cobham took the first one, employing Eric Collins, 
the best sailplane pilot in Britain at the time and the first 
British Silver C pilot, to fly it. Tragically, in a display at 
Upwood, Cambridgeshire, on 30 July 1935, Collins 
unwisely attempted an outside loop. The Grunau Baby 
had not been designed for inverted manoeuvres of this 
sort, and the wing collapsed. Although Collins had a 
parachute he did not use it and was killed.
The London Club took delivery of their Slingsby 
Grunau Baby 2 soon after this disaster. It was very 
successful, operating with the club fleet alongside the 
Desoutter Baby. Other clubs and private owner groups 
soon followed the Dunstable lead.
The market for sailplanes in Britain was not large. 
The relatively small total of Grunau Babies coming 
from Kirbymoorside during the next few years may be 
explained partly by the fact that Slingsby was very 
soon offering other types of sailplane in direct 
competition with the Baby. The first Kirby Kite was 
already under construction before the London Gliding 
Club received their Grunau Baby 2. Before long 
Slingsby was also offering the Type 7 Kadet and Type 8 
Tutor, which were, in Britain, destined to take over the 
Grunau Baby's role and were cheaper.
On 31 July Angus O. Pick set a British duration 
record of 13hr 27min in a Slingsby Grunau Baby at 
Sutton Bank during an 'advanced course' held by the 
Yorkshire Gliding Club. During this flight he witnessed, 
from above, a mid-air collision between another 
Grunau Baby and a Scud 2. The Scud, flown by W. R. 
Horsfield, lost its nose, leaving the pilot's feet dangling 
in mid-air, but he was able to land in trees and climbed 
down unhurt. The Grunau 'fluttered down like a piece 
of paper, for its tail was nearly off, but the pilot, Billy 
Sharpe, also escaped injury.
Perhaps the most remarkable flight made in a 
Grunau Baby in England was the climb to 11,140ft 
(3,398m) by Noel McClean in June 1939 in the Helm 
Wind wave over Cross Fell. The cold was intense in the 
open cockpit, and contraction of the cables in the low 
temperatures caused all the controls to become
extremely stiff. Getting the Baby 2 down without any 
type of spoilers or dive brakes proved extremely diffi- 
cult. Drifting back to the downward side of the wave 
would have dumped the sailplane far from home in 
rough country, as had already happened to another 
pilot. McClean rightly flew on the upwind side of the 
cap cloud, but getting down through the upcurrent was 
almost impossible. Steep sideslipping was the only 
way the sailplane could be forced to lose height 
without gaining excessive airspeed. McClean landed 
safely at last, but held the record for only a few weeks.
In Germany, development continued. A little more 
span; revised, narrower ailerons; spoilers and an 
improved cockpit enclosure with canopy and wind- 
screen at last, appeared on the Grunau Baby 2A, and 
the elevator was redesigned. Subsequently the Grunau 
Baby 2B became the standard training sailplane 
adopted by the National Socialist Fliegerkorps to train 
many thousands of Hitler Youth pilots. It had powerful 
air brakes of Schempp Hirth 'parallel ruler' type, and a 
droppable wheeled dolly for take-off. Probably more 
of this variant were built than of all the rest put 
together. Derivatives of the Baby 2B were produced in 
considerable numbers outside Germany after 1945.
Edmund Schneider was forced to flee westwards 
with his family in 1944, losing his factory. He neverthe- 
less designed the Grunau Baby 3, which had a slightly 
simplified wing, doing away with the redundant front 
fuselage attachment fitting, and more washout. A 
landing wheel was built-in, and the cockpit was 
improved. The type was built under licence at 
Poppenhausen by Alexander Schleicher.
Schneider and his two sons, Harry and Edmund 
Junior, moved to Australia in 1951, and the Grunau 4 and 
4B were manufactured in Adelaide. These were really 
quite new designs, only the name carrying on the old 
tradition. Harry Schneider continued the business after 
his father's retirement. Edmund senior died in 1968.
Although the Slingsby factory was responsible for 
the reconditioning and repair of some Grunau Baby 
2Bs, in the immediate post-war period, there was no 
further production of the type at Kirbymoorside. 
Elliotts of Newbury stepped in, producing about 50 
examples of the EON Baby, with a wheel and enlarged 
cockpit.
Grunau Baby 2 data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Wing sections:
Root
Tip 
Length o.a.
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
13.5m (44ft Gin) 
14.5m2 (156ft2) 
11.4
Gottingen 535 
Symmetrical 
5.68m (18.6ft)
160kg (3521b) 
250kg (5501b) 
11.4kg/m2 (2.341b/ft2)
33

--- PAGE 36 ---
The London Gliding Club's Grunau Baby 2 outside the club­ 
house. It was finished in clear dope and varnish. The 
competition number 6 and the Slingsby golden eagle trade-
A Grunau Baby 2 bungee launched at the Wasserkuppe in 
the 1933 competitions. A windscreen has been fitted to this 
example and some instruments are carried, as indicated by 
the venturi and pitot tube on the front fuselage decking. 
Others of the type are visible on the ground. The markings 
were typical of the year in which Adolf Hitler came to power.
mark appear on the rudder. The sailplane behind the Baby is 
a Rhb'nbussard. (A. E. Slater)
The sailplane was finished in clear dope and varnish, and 
the registration number 6 indicated the Silesian region. The 
swastika appeared on the port side of the rudder only. On the 
starboard side at this time the Imperial German Tricolour 
appeared. Only after 1937 did the swastika appear on both 
sides. (E. Schneider)
Typically, the Grunau Baby 2 was flown without any wind­ 
screen or cockpit canopy. This example is in Australia. (The 
Age, Melbourne)

--- PAGE 37 ---
A Grunau Baby 2 flying in England in 1938. (A. E. Slater)
The Desoutter Grunau Baby 1 flying at Dunstable. Note the 
straight-backed fuselage and tall rudder. A diagonal bracing 
wire ran from the strut fitting on the wing to fittings on the 
front fuselage frame. (C. Brown)
A Grunau Baby 2A in Yugoslavian colours. Note the revised 
form of elevator and cockpit canopy, but the absence of air 
brakes.
Last of the line. A Grunau Baby 4 on winch launch at 
Waikerie, South Australia, in 1957. The wing was completely 
different in both section and plan view, and the fuselage with 
a fully-enclosed cockpit, bore little relationship to the original 
Baby. (Courtesy Adelaide Advertiser)

--- PAGE 38 ---
-406-—584
Root wing section 
Gottingen 652
Tip wing section 
RAF 32
Drawn by Martin Simons 1991
Hjordis
305

--- PAGE 39 ---
Hjordis
The Hjordis, named after the heroine of a Norse saga, 
made its first public appearance at the EGA competi- 
tions at Sutton Bank in August 1935. This completely 
new British sailplane had been test flown and made its 
first soaring flights just before the competition. It was 
designed by Sqn Ldr Mungo Buxton of the Royal Air 
Force. Buxton, in partnership with Philip Wills, placed 
the order for its construction with Slingsby in 1934, but 
for some reason it never acquired a Slingsby type 
number. The drawings supplied by Buxton showed all 
the main features of the proposed aircraft, but most of 
the details remained to be worked out. A good deal was 
evidently done in the workshops and never fully com- 
mitted to paper. Only one of the type was built.
Buxton was well known to British glider pilots 
through his successful soaring flights and articles, 
some quite technical, in Sailplane and Glider. He used 
the pen name 'Kentigern'. Wills was Britain's second 
'Silver C' soaring pilot, with many outstanding soaring 
flights to his credit.
The Hjordis was greeted with astonishment. It 
invited comparison with two other sailplanes well 
known in Britain but imported from Germany. The 
Rhonbussard, designed by Hans Jacobs, was small 
with a rounded but rather dumpy fuselage and an open 
cockpit under the leading edge of the high-mounted 
wing. It was rather like a version of the Grunau Baby, 
but improved with a rounded fuselage and cantilever 
wing. It had the same wing section. The Rhonadler by 
the same designer was larger, spanning over 17m (56ft) 
and having a very strongly tapered cantilever wing 
mounted on a low pylon above a streamlined fuselage. 
The cockpit was fully enclosed. Its reputation was 
already established, since in the expert hands of the 
late Eric Collins it had broken the British cross- 
country distance record. The type was known to be 
very popular with clubs in Germany and, like the 
Rhonbussard, was in factory production there.
The Hjordis had a cantilever wing of unusually high 
aspect ratio, strongly cambered and very thick at the 
root, mounted on a very tall, narrow pylon above an 
exceptionally refined fuselage. Spanning just over
15.5m (51ft) the wing had a slight anhedral angle. 
Viewed from the front, the undersurface of the wing 
was flat from tip to tip. The taper in thickness resulted 
in the upper side of the wing descending. This very 
unusual feature was never explained by Buxton, but he 
may have thought it would improve response to the 
lateral controls. The cockpit looked unbearably 
cramped. A cartoon published in Sailplane and Glider 
suggested that Philip Wills, the pilot, 'does not clamber 
into the cockpit, he just sits down and has Hjordis 
wrapped round him'. Wills was very tall but, fortu- 
nately, slender. The transparent canopy must have 
seemed almost claustrophobic. There was a small 
wheel on the control column instead of the familiar 
stick to operate the ailerons, as there was insufficient 
room to move a joystick laterally.
Buxton had made a careful study of the latest 
German high-performance sailplanes, most of which at 
this period were very large and expensive, with wing 
spans usually of 19 or 20m (62-66ft), even reaching 30m 
(98ft) in the case of the Austria built for Robert 
Kronfeld. In straight flight there was no doubt about 
the superb performance of these large sailplanes, and 
they were magnificent for hill soaring, gliding from hill 
to hill at relatively small heights, but there were doubts 
in some minds about their controllability. Circling in 
small and feeble thermal upcurrents might be beyond 
them. Experiments were going on at Akaflieg 
Darmstadt with the Windspiel, a very small, light 
sailplane, and in Britain there was the little Scud 2 
designed and manufactured by L. E. Baynes. Wills and 
Buxton had done well with a Scud they had owned.
The German monsters were heavy and cumbersome 
on the ground, requiring substantial numbers of people 
to rig them and drag them to the launching point and to 
de-rig them after an outlanding. Buxton had in mind 
the needs of private-owner syndicates who would 
operate with minimal crew. He aimed to achieve the 
best possible soaring performance with a relatively 
modest wing span. A tapered planform was necessary, 
both to cut tip vortex drag and to ensure adequate 
depth of spar to accommodate bending loads at the
37

--- PAGE 40 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
inner end of the cantilever wing. This was exemplified 
by the Rhonadler, which had a taper ratio of more than 
5:1, i.e., the tip chord was less than one fifth of the root 
chord. The taper of the Hjordis wing was fairly pro- 
nounced, the ratio being about 4:1, not as extreme as 
that of the Rhonadler.
Compared with a rectangular wing plan, taper 
reduces the induced aerodynamic downwash over the 
outer parts of the lifting surface, so the narrow outer 
panels meet the airflow at a high aerodynamic angle of 
attack. The tips tend to stall before the wing root, a 
common cause of spinning accidents when approach- 
ing to land. All sailplane designers were well 
acquainted with this problem. On the Rhonadler, large 
amounts of negative wing twist or 'washout' were used 
to ensure that the tips did not stall early. Hjordis incor- 
porated similar ideas.
The choice of the thick, strongly cambered 
Gottingen 652 section for the wing root of Hjordis was 
influenced by the successes of the famous Fafnir 
sailplane designed by Alexander Lippisch, and by the 
refined Kakadu of the Austrian Dr Kupper, who also 
designed the huge Austria. All used the Go 652, and L. 
E. Baynes had also proved it successfully on the Scud 
2. The Rhonadler root section was a modified version 
of the same profile.The section at the mid semi-span 
position was one Buxton s own devising, thinner and 
less strongly cambered than Go 652. From this position 
the profile changed gradually to RAF.32 at the extreme 
tips. The layout was cleverly devised so that, geo- 
metrically, the base lines from which the various pro- 
files were plotted remained in alignment, Buxton 
pointed out that the wing could be built on a flat bench, 
somewhat like a model aeroplane wing on a simple 
building board. Each rib would touch the flat surface at 
two points and would automatically be at the required 
rigging angle, no complicated blocking up or jigging 
being needed. Because of the gradual variation of 
camber and thickness there was 6° of aerodynamic- 
washout, although geometrically there appeared to be 
none. This stratagem was entirely successful, and tip 
stalling was never a problem with Hjordis. It was found 
impossible to make the sailplane spin.
The main wingspar was necessarily massive, the 
flanges laminated in spruce with plywood shear 
webbing and hefty steel fittings with horizontal pins to 
attach the wings separately to the fuselage pylon. A 
lighter rear spar carried the ailerons. The ribs, with 
narrow spruce booms and substantial plywood webs 
to stiffen them, were spaced at a pitch of Sin (203mm). 
This was less than usual, but obviated the need for 
intermediate sub-ribs ahead of the main spar. The most 
unusual feature of the wing was that it was covered 
with plywood back to the auxiliary spar, when the 
usual practice at this time was to use ply skin only 
around the leading edge and cover the rest with doped 
fabric. The advantages of the extended stressed skin 
were that the aerofoil section was more accurately pre- 
served and the wing was very much stiffer in torsion. 
The total weight of the aircraft was considerably
increased, and unlike most sailplanes of the period the 
plywood covered areas were painted, which added a 
few more pounds. The colour was light grey, or 
turquoise grey according to some accounts, rather 
than white. The extra weight of the paint was not sig- 
nificant. Buxton's calculations suggested, in any case, 
that a high wing loading was desirable for cross- 
country flying, providing everything possible was done 
to reduce drag. The fabric covered areas were clear- 
doped and varnished, which was orthodox practice. 
After assembly, the gap between the wings was closed 
with a light plywood fairing.
The fuselage was a nearly perfect cigar shape with 
only slight downward droop of the form near the nose. 
The usual semi-monocoque structure was employed, 
with four main longerons supported by circular cross- 
frames and a complete plywood skin. The tall pylon 
was based on two very robust vertical spars connect- 
ing the wing fittings directly to the main skid attach- 
ments. Buxton had seen various types of accidents to 
sailplanes with pylon-mounted wings. In some cases, 
when a tip dragged on the ground during a landing, the 
wing could twist completely off the fuselage. In a 
touchdown with a little sideways drift, the fuselage 
might be torn off and rolled under the wing. Minor 
errors of judgement could thus become bad accidents. 
The Hjordis pylon was stressed to withstand a side 
load of half a tonne applied at the skid, and 50kg 
(HOlb) dragging force applied at the wingtip.
The tailplane was of the all-moving type, mounted 
part way up the triangular fin. Buxton again was influ- 
enced by German experience. Some sailplanes with 
tailplanes mounted too low had been damaged with 
catastrophic results when the elevator touched rough 
ground on take-off. Giinther Groenhoff had been killed 
at the Wasserkuppe in such an accident in 1932. 
Hjordis had a large rudder with only a little aero- 
dynamic balancing.
After the end of the 1935 BGA meeting, the editor of 
Sailplane and Glider reported that the new sailplane 
'seems to have a simply phenomenal performance'. 
Wills carried off the de Havilland Cup for height gain 
and the Manio Cup for a pre-declared out and return 
cross country flight of 38km (23.5 miles).
All was not entirely well, however. One minor 
problem was discovered early and easily corrected. 
The wing itself, though torsionally stiff, was too flex- 
ible in bending near the tips. After landing, a sailplane 
tilts over until the wingtip on one side touches the 
ground. The flexibility of the outer spars allowed the 
underside to be pressed down on to the surface for 
some distance, so any stones readily punctured the 
thin skin. Re- skinning with heavier plywood was nec- 
essary. Philip Wills wrote: 'Quite soon it became appar- 
ent that designers have paid too much attention to 
aerodynamic form and far too little to the shape of the 
human behind and the needs of the human frame'. He 
was giving an account of the flight he made in July 
1936, which, unpleasant though it was for him, broke 
the British distance record, 167km (103.5 miles) from
38

--- PAGE 41 ---
HJORDIS
Dunstable to the coast south of Lowest oft. The sun 
beating into the cockpit through the minute talc roof 
soon gave me a splitting headache. Constant circling 
and hard work rapidly transformed this into a sick 
headache. Then came a thirst like the Sahara, closely 
followed by cramp.' Relief came only when he 'burst 
thickly out of Hjordis' and sensed 'the fresh, cool smell 
of the sea.' Additional vents were cut. The cramps were 
reduced a little by chopping out half-moon shaped 
pieces on either side of the canopy. From this time 
Wills flew Hjordis with his shoulders sticking out into 
the breeze.
Buxton himself admitted that the controls were not 
good. The elevator was too sensitive, and without a 
trim tab at high speeds the load on the stick was too 
great. The ailerons were also unsatisfactory. They 
lacked diagonal stiffeners and so deflected several 
degrees at the ends under load, giving poor control. 
The fin was too small. More directional stability was 
needed.
Probably most serious of all, the Hjordis had no 
spoilers or airbrakes. Philip Wills was beginning at this 
time, as he put it, to nibble nervously at clouds, and he 
had fitted some gyro instruments. On his first serious 
attempt to circle up blind inside a cumulus, at an 
Easter meeting in Derbyshire, he lost control within a 
minute or two. The airspeed indicator went twice 
round the dial and he 'burst out of the cloud base in a 
dive rather over the vertical' with the Hjordis 'bellow- 
ing like a bull in considerable pain'. The sailplane did 
not break up, probably owing to the good torsional 
resistance of the plywood skinned wings.
It had originally been intended to fit an airbrake. The 
idea was to make the rudder in two pieces, split like a 
clamshell along the hinge line. When right or left 
rudder was applied in the normal way, the two 
clamshells would move together to the same side. To 
brake, both of the pilot's feet would be pushed forward 
and the two shell halves would open out in opposite 
senses to create high drag. This rudder brake was 
never fitted. Buxton wrote that among so many new 
developments this seemed just one too much. In any 
case a similar notion had been tried, and had failed, on 
Kronfeld's Austria. In a spiral dive in cloud similar to 
that in which Wills found himself, Kronfeld discovered 
it was impossible to operate the opposed rudder 
braking system against the very great loads arising 
from the high airspeed. The Austria broke up and 
Kronfeld had to bale out.
Apart from the dangers of cloud flying without air- 
brakes, it was a pity that the Hjordis was without even 
elementary spoilers for landing. Wills damaged it many 
times because there was no reliable way of getting 
safely down within a reasonable space. Sideslipping, 
turning the entire fuselage at an angle to the airflow, 
could help during the early phases of a landing 
approach, but the wings had to be levelled well before 
touchdown. Skimming a few feet off the ground, some 
extra drag could be created by fishtailing; using the 
rudder to yaw the aircraft from side to side. This also
had to stop before landing. On levelling out and 
straightening up to flare-out, just when high drag was 
needed, it was reduced because of the proximity of the 
ground and its restraining effects on the induced 
down wash. After a cross-country flight Hjordis would 
float and float and float across a small field until it hit 
the upwind boundary or until the pilot deliberately 
ground-looped to prevent hitting it. In one landing 
Wills turned it over completely. Buxton mentioned 
another accident which broke one wing in two and 
severely twisted the pylon. Only his strong vertical 
members prevented the glider wringing its neck. There 
were many other occasions when it had t o go back to 
Slingsby for repairs.
Despite the limitations of his aircraft, Wills had 
many successes. He captured national records for 
height gain as well as distance. In the 1936 BGA 
competitions at Camphill in the Peak District he won 
the cross-country flying prize, reaching Lincoln. It was 
not customary at this time to total up the scores and 
declare a National Champion. Separate prizes were 
awarded for slope soaring duration flights and gains of 
height as readily as for distance. It was recognised, 
nonetheless, that Wills and Hjordis were an outstand- 
ingly good combination.
The first truly international soaring championships 
were held in Germany during July 1937. Five British 
sailplanes were entered. Wills preferred to take 
Hjordis, with which by now he was thoroughly famil- 
iar, rather than one of the new and, as it proved, unreli- 
able King Kites. Wills placed 14th, exactly halfway 
down the list. He had his usual problems on landing, 
ending one flight with the sailplane's nose in a stream 
but he and the rest of the British group learned a great 
deal by observing how the more experienced German 
and Polish pilots flew. Doubts about the thermal 
soaring capabilities of their large aircraft were entirely 
dispersed.
Soon after the team's return from Germany the 
British Nationals of 1937 were held in Derbyshire 
under new rules emphasising distance flying. Wills 
won outright with three flights over 110km (68.2 
miles), two of them ending at North Coates on the 
Lincolnshire coast. These were not the longest flights 
of the contest, but Wills became champion by virtue of 
his consistency over several days.
In August of the same year Wills, on a splendid 
soaring day, reached the coast of the English Channel, 
having been launched at Dunstable in the late morning. 
The coast of France was well in sight as he approached 
Dover and he calculated, conservatively, that he 
needed about 1,650m (5,500ft) to get across. A dark 
cumulus over the town gave him hope of one more 
good climb, but it let him down and he was forced to 
land, awkwardly as usual, in a valley with unexpected 
crosswinds. One more good thermal and he would 
undoubtedly have made the crossing, and it was early 
enough in the day for him to have continued for some 
distance inland on the far side.
After seeing what was now available in Germany,
39

--- PAGE 42 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
Wills was planning to buy something more stable, more 
controllable and more comfortable, a Minimoa.
Advertisements appearing in Sailplane and Glider 
early in 1938 stated:
For sale, HJORDIS, the outstanding British high effi- 
ciency sailplane. It holds the British distance and 
goal flight record, placed first in the 1937 British 
competitions; holds most of the British Gliding tro- 
phies and awards. It has done over 850 miles of 
cross-country flying (on purpose), has been dived to 
125mph in cloud (by accident), is extremely strong 
(by gum); won the distance trophy (by Wakefield); is 
in first class condition (by Slingsby); and is for sale 
by Philip Wills.
The price was SI 10. A Scud 2 would have cost £90 and a 
Slingsby Falcon 1 £60 at this time. Despite the impres- 
sive list of achievements, Hjordis was not instantly 
picked up as a bargain. Perhaps British pilots had been 
made aware that it was not easy to fly, a claim notice- 
ably absent from the advertisement. It was bought 
eventually by Messrs Brink & Horrell in Johannesburg. 
Very little was heard about its exploits after it left 
Britain, but it was flown in South Africa for some years. 
A rare photograph shows that, to begin with at least, it 
retained its British civil registration letters, G-GAAA, 
and the 1937 Wasserkuppe competition number 15 
remained on the nose. Officially it was registered as ZS- 
23. It was used late in 1939 by E. Dommisse for a record 
height climb to 3,600m (12,000ft) above ground, which, 
since the take-off was from Quaggaport 1,740m 
(5,800ft) above sea level, represented an altitude of 
5,340m (17,800ft) without oxygen breathing apparatus. 
The last 1,200m (4,000ft) of the ascent were in cloud 
without blind flying instruments, Dommisse relying on 
his airspeed indicator and a simple cross-level bubble. 
What finally became of Hjordis is not known. Its 
remains might still survive in a forgotten corner some- 
where.
Hjordis data
Dimensions
Wingspan 
Wing area 
Aspect ratio 
Wing sections:
Root
Tip 
Length o.a.
Weights
Tare 
Flying 
Wing loading
15.54m (51ft) 
11.52m2 (124ft2) 
21
Gottingen 652
RAF.32
6.58m (21ft 7in)
143.8kg (3171b) 
217.2kg (4801b) 
18.94kg/nr (3.91b/ft2)
Philip Wills in the cockpit of Hjordis, with the modifications to 
accommodate his shoulders. (Wills collection)
I

--- PAGE 43 ---
Hjordis after export to South Africa. Details of the occasion 
are not known. (A. J. R. Brink)
The cockpit canopy of Hjordis before modification. The main fittings on the fuselage frame are also visible.
( Wills collection)
The start of a winch launch at the BGA competitions at 
Camphill, Derbyshire, in 1936. Wills won the distance prize 
for a flight to Lincoln. In the background is the Golden Wren
sailplane which pioneered operations on the site. 
( Wills collection)

--- PAGE 44 ---
SLINGSBY SAILPLANES
Philip and Kitty Wills, his indefatigable crew chief for many 
years, relax while waiting for a launch at the 1937 interna­ 
tionals. ( Wills collection)
Hjordis at the Wasserkuppe in 1937. The registration was 
allocated only for the purpose of travelling overseas, but was 
never removed. ( Wi