ckness
on the veneer surface with vigorous rolling. Coating
thickness is easy to feel with the roller, but guard
against the common tendency to spread the epoxy a bit
further than you should.
A good way to check your spread rate is to examine the
results. Apply what you think is a sufficient quantity to
the surfaces and staple the veneer in place with the
pattern that you plan to follow. Immediately pull all of
the staples and carefully remove the veneer. You will be
able to see areas on both pieces where contact was
made between the two surfaces. Even more apparent
will be still-shiny epoxy on either surface. This indicates
no contact and in a real lamination would probably
result in a void.
Chapter 21 – Laminating Veneer Over a Mold or Plug
239
Figure 21-16 Rolling an epoxy mixture, slightly thickened
with low-density filler, onto cedar veneer with a foam roller.
Figure 21-17  The WEST SYSTEM 809 Notched Spreader for
applying epoxy.

--- PAGE 254 ---
Voids may be caused by too little staple pressure, by
insufficient quantities of adhesive, and by non-uniform
epoxy application. Check the removed veneer for staple
holes in and around the void. It may be obvious that
there were too few staples, and therefore not enough
pressure, in that area. Significant numbers and areas of
voids indicate a general lack of adhesive. If you see no
voids at all, but excessive quantities of epoxy exude
from around the edges of the veneer, you are probably
applying too much. Reduce the amount on the next try
and keep experimenting until you gain sufficient
experience.
Applying the Second Layer of Veneer
The laminating process really begins with the second
layer of veneer. Start this layer as you did the first by
positioning a master veneer in the middle of the mold.
This veneer usually runs at the same angle as the first
layer, but in the opposite direction so as to form a
balanced double diagonal.
When you have decided its position, use a pencil to
carefully outline the new master veneer on the first
layer and then remove the piece. Pull out all first layer
staples within the marked area and release it from the
mold. First layer veneers are roughly perpendicular to
second layer veneers, so this staple pulling does not
usually disturb their positioning. Staples on either side
of the marked area will continue to hold the first layer
in place.
When you are ready to attach the second-layer master
veneer, apply adhesive to both the outlined surface on
the first layer and the underside of the new master
veneer. Put the piece in its marked position and hold it
with your hand while you insert several locating staples
at both outer edges, about midpoint along the plank.
These staples keep the veneer from moving and help to
free both hands for stapling. Use an adequate stapling
pattern for your situation and laminate the master
veneer. Remove any epoxy that squeezes out at the
edges so that uncured epoxy won’t interfere with your
next task.
Spile a neighboring veneer just as you did on the first
layer, but do not bond it to the mold. We recommend
that you wait to apply adhesive to second layer veneers
until you have spiled and fitted the entire layer. When
they are trimmed, temporarily position pieces with a
few staples (it’s not necessary that they be held snug
against the mold as long as they lie flat and their adjacent
edges fit) until you have covered the entire hull surface.
Then go back to the veneers on either side of the master
veneer and begin laminating.
To do this, remove a piece or two at a time, apply suffi-
cient epoxy mixture to all bonding surfaces, and staple
the new veneer in place. Proceed down the hull until
you have bonded the entire layer. While there is a
disadvantage to this method in that you have to tack
the wood to the mold twice, the real efficiency comes
from being able to laminate all the veneers at one time.
This uses both epoxy/filler and labor economically and
avoids much of the mess that results from simultaneous
spiling and bonding operations.
You can remove staples from second layer veneers
before you have installed the entire layer. Try to pull
staples out before the epoxy has fully cured. We find
that it works best to apply veneers one day and pull 
the staples the next, but you can begin as soon as 7 
or 8 hours after application.
If you find areas where the two layers relax slightly
from the mold as you pull out the fasteners, restaple
them tightly with as few permanent, non-rusting
staples as possible. This springback is a problem only
on hulls with unusual shapes and curves, and its only
significance is that the staples may make the hull a
little more difficult to remove from the mold. We’ve
never had much trouble with this in our hulls, but we
240
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 21-18 Installing a second layer of planking.

--- PAGE 255 ---
have never had to leave in more than a dozen or so
staples. When you remove the hull from the mold,
clip any protruding staples flush with sidenippers or
wire cutters and sand smooth.
If there is to be a third layer, lightly fair the hull before
you apply it. Use a hand plane and a hand fairing block
with rough sandpaper to remove any lumps of epoxy
between the edges of the veneers and any humps and
bumps which have developed during laminating. You
can speed this process considerably by using a light
duty, 2100-rpm polisher with a foam disc grinding pad.
We bond a piece of plastic or plywood to the pad, and
this combination does a better job of fairing high spots
than the foam disc itself. Check general fairness by
laying a light batten at various angles on the lamination.
Any humps will immediately show up. Quickly mark
them with chalk or pencil for removal.
Mechanical Spiling
A major problem with laminating a wooden hull is the
tedious spiling required. Proper spiling demands a good
deal of time and skill. While first layers, and usually last
layers, must be spiled by hand, you can fit and trim the
layers in between, however many there are, with a faster
and simpler mechanical spiling process.
A mechanical spiler is basically a tool that will cut even
gaps between veneers. This trimming takes place on the
hull, after thickened epoxy has been applied to the
bonding surfaces and the veneers are stapled in place.
The gaps are filled with standard size filler veneers—
narrow strips of laminating material. With a spiler, it 
is possible to laminate an entire hull with minimal
amounts of hand spiling. If a hull has enough
compound curvature to necessitate a lot of spiling, a
mechanical system can be an important time saver.
Unfortunately, no mechanical spiling tool is available in
the stores. You will have to make your own, but this is
not difficult. There are several ways to make them, but
only two basic types of spilers. The first and most
common uses a circular saw blade, while the second
uses a router with a small fly-cutting attachment. We
usually use the saw type and have developed a number
of variations on it which work fairly well.
Any machine used for spiling should be able to make a
1⁄8" (3mm) cut approximately 2" (50mm) away from the
Chapter 21 – Laminating Veneer Over a Mold or Plug
241
Figure 21-19  Marking and preparing a hull for the second layer of veneer. Note that staples are left in the first layer until planks
of the second layer are spiled.
Plank of the second veneer
layer glued and stapled.
Staples holding first layer of
veneer to mold.
Area prepared for the second layer.
Glue bumps and ridges sanded.

--- PAGE 256 ---
edge of a permanently positioned veneer. This veneer
acts as a guide on which the tool rides. It’s important,
of course, that the machine cut exactly 1⁄8" deep, so it
will not cut into the veneer under it. There can be no
gaps between veneers wider than the 2" the tool can
cut. Since typical planks are about 3⁄4" (18mm) apart 
at the ends and 13⁄4" (45mm) apart at the middle, this is
not a serious limitation. Whichever tool you use, make
sure that it is sharp. Otherwise, the blade will tend to
follow the grain of the veneers, which, when it runs in
the wrong direction, will pull the saw guide away from
the true veneer edge.
When we laminate our veneers with a mechanical spiler,
we’re careful not to shoot any staples in the area where
the machine will cut. We cut one veneer with the spiler,
using the opposing veneer as a guide. The tapered space
between the pieces thus becomes a swath exactly 2"
wide. We remove the wood that has been cut away and
then carefully clean any sawdust and contaminated
adhesive from the gap and apply fresh adhesive. Next,
we fit a 2" wide filler veneer, filling up the gap between
the two veneers. This procedure is repeated over and
over for each space between veneers over the entire hull.
We usually have one team that applies only veneers and
moves down the hull quite rapidly, carefully setting
each veneer so that a minimum amount of waste is
generated in the spiling process. These workers scribe
the filler spacing and make a point of stapling outside
the area of veneer that will be removed. The spiling
team follows, sawing 2" gaps and immediately
laminating 2" veneer strips in the slots they cut. Fitting
and laminating in a single operation is very fast and
makes the laminated hull more economically feasible
from the standpoint of man hours required.
We should point out that cutting and removing veneer
to make the 2" gap must be done before the epoxy in
the lamination has cured. When the adhesive is allowed
to set too long, it’s very difficult and time consuming to
remove excess veneer and epoxy to prepare the opening
for the filler veneer.
Figure 21-20 shows a simple spiling tool made from 
a small hand drill. A 10" long, 1⁄2" wide by 1⁄8" thick
(250mm  12mm  3mm) piece of steel forms a
guide. We bend this until it conforms to the hull’s more
severe curves and follows a veneer edge. We then make
our own small circular 2" diameter saw blade from the
steel blade of an old hand saw, bolt this blade between
two nuts on a 3⁄8" (9mm) diameter shaft of threaded
rod, and chuck it in the drill. Finally, we bond a piece
of wood to the top of the drill as close to the front and
the chuck as possible to control the cutting depth of
the saw blade.
A tool that is easier to adapt but a little bulkier and
heavier was the small 41⁄2" (115mm) diameter panel
saw. With this, just bolt a simple guide on the base and
set the saw depth for 1⁄8" (3mm). The modified panel
saw works very well in most situations, but it is a little
cumbersome to operate when cutting veneers on bigger
boats.
You can also use a router for mechanical spiling, as
shown in Figure 21-20. A router cut has a major
advantage in that it is not influenced by the grain of 
the wood and can therefore be more accurate. Its 
disadvantage is that it makes a good deal of wood
debris and this contaminates the area between the two
veneers and requires more cleanup before the filler
veneer can be installed. Router bits also wear out faster
than saw blades. In spite of these shortcomings, some
builders prefer router mechanical spilers because of
their accuracy.
242
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 21-20  Mechanical spiling tools.
Drill motor chocked
and secured
Plywood
base
plate
1⁄8" Flexible guide
Router jig for
spiling/cutting
Blade
Shaft
Nuts
Drill motor
Base
Saw set flush with
bottom of guide

--- PAGE 257 ---
Applying the Third and Subsequent Layers
After a light fairing, proceed to the third lamination.
This differs dramatically from the first two in that you
no longer staple to the mold. Instead, you will laminate
and staple only to the previous two layers. Begin by
placing a master veneer at the desired angle midpoint
on the hull as you did with the first two laminations.
Since you do not want to staple into the mold, use
shorter staples. For the third layer of 1⁄8" (3mm) veneer,
for example, choose 3⁄8" or 5⁄16" (9mm or 8mm) staples
instead of 1⁄2" (12mm) ones. You also now have the
option of leaving staples in place, thereby saving
yourself some time. If you decide against pulling
them, use non-rusting alloy staples, inserted so that
they are slightly recessed. Otherwise, you may have
some trouble when you try to rough fair or smooth the
surface in preparation for the next layer. When you use
power machines for fairing, you can grind flush any
protruding alloy staples.
Apply all succeeding laminations in the same way,
leaving the staples in or pulling them out, whichever
you prefer. The last layer, however, is applied in a
special way and the staples are always removed.
Fair and smooth up the hull before you apply the final
layer of veneer, especially if it will be naturally finished.
It’s better to remove humps and fill hollows on the
next-to-last layer than to attempt to correct them in the
final layer. Aim for a level of overall fairness so that you
will need to remove no more than 1⁄16" (1mm) of your
final lamination during final fairing.
If you are seriously out of fair and it appears that a lot
of work will be needed, consider removing the staples
on the next-to-last layer to speed up the process. Fill
any deep depressions with a very thick, easily sanded
and faired 407 Low-Density Filler/epoxy mixture. Remove
high spots, using a batten to continually check fairness.
Applying the Final Layer of Veneer
The stapling procedure and lay of veneer you use on
the final layer depends on whether you plan to paint 
or clear coat your hull. A natural finish requires an
unblemished surface, and this calls for a little extra 
care, but the results always seem to be worth the effort.
If you will be painting your hull, apply the final layer of
veneer as you did the second layer. We generally use
plastic stapling strips on the last layer of painted hulls
because they are quicker than the wood strips required
for natural hulls. Each staple leaves a small indentation
in the wood, but we sand most of these away as we fair
and can easily take care of any others during coating
and final finishing. Even though you can cover mistakes
on a painted surface, it’s more efficient to take extra care
when applying the last layer of veneer. The jobs of
filling and sanding gouges, voids, and so on are very
time-consuming, so the less you have to do, the faster
final finishing progresses.
With surfaces that will be either sanded or painted, take
particular care to accurately spile and fit the last layer.
Pay attention to the edges of the veneers as you laminate
to make sure that they end up soundly bonded together
through to the outer surface. We always coat both the
flat surface and the edges of the last layer of veneer just
to be certain that they won’t be dry.
The decision to clear coat a hull exterior is usually
based on personal taste. Some naturally finished boats
have been done with such taste and skill that they are
considered works of art and are talked about and 
Chapter 21 – Laminating Veneer Over a Mold or Plug
243
Figure 21-21 Applying the final layer of veneer on IOR 2-ton
Golden Dazy. Topsides of this layer were laid fore and aft, and
bottom veneers laid athwartship and butted as in the photo.
Note that the layer of veneer below the final layer is of much
wider veneers.

--- PAGE 258 ---
admired. Unfortunately, you have to balance the desire
for this type of beauty against the realities of the extra
long-term maintenance invariably required to keep a
naturally finished surface in top shape.
As we discussed in Chapter 15, sunlight is the major
enemy of clear-coated hulls. Natural finishes can break
down very quickly, and naturally finished hulls can be
much more work to repair than painted hulls if you
want to restore the surface’s original beauty.
Early in your project, sort out your very best veneers
and save them for the last layer. Personal taste and
wood quality will dictate your choices. You can apply
this layer either diagonally or horizontally. It may be
that more longitudinal fiber is desirable in your hull, in
which case it’s advisable to run the last layer horizon-
tally. In larger hulls with many laminations, however,
the direction of a single outer layer may be of little
significance to the overall strength and stiffness of the
structure, so personal preference can determine the
direction of the veneers.
Hull sides are usually clear coated only to the water
line. Boat bottoms are almost always painted, and it is
not necessary to continue the veneer orientation used
in the bright finish down to the area that will be
painted. You can, therefore, plank the sides of a hull
horizontally to its waterline and finish off the bottom
with typical diagonal planking. In some boats, this may
be a structurally advantageous combination.
We hand spile diagonally laid veneers on the last layer
of a naturally finished hull and take particular pains 
to make excellent fits. We think that a uniform veneer
width, usually between 4" and 6" (100mm and 150mm),
over the entire hull looks better than random widths.
Diagonally laid, bright finish is common on boats up 
to 30' (9m) and is rarely seen on longer boats, but as
far as we are concerned, tradition is the only limitation.
When we apply veneer horizontally, we always choose 
a standard veneer size, usually no more than 11⁄2"
(40mm) wide. Narrow, uniform veneers are pleasant to
look at and also bend easily around the hull with little
or no spiling. They can be spiled, as planked hulls have
been for centuries, but we feel that the extra time is not
warranted if it can be avoided. Therefore, fitting the last
layer in a horizontal direction is relatively easy because
you are able to bend the veneer in two directions at once.
We do not scarf the veneers for length, but carefully
butt them as we install them, staggering butts down the
hull for better appearance and greater strength.
Horizontal planking usually starts several inches below
the sheer at the midpoint of the boat, with the ends of
the planking sweeping up to deck level toward the bow
and stern. Planking that curves slightly more than the
sheer line looks good and, at the same time, makes
some room for the planks to straighten out further on
down the hull. The goal is to let the planks run no less
than parallel to the waterline as it approaches the
bottom of the hull. To prevent any “reversing” of the
planking, measure from the master veneer to the load
waterline. If the distance at the middle is more than at
the ends, the planking will tend to reverse or curve the
other way, so adjust the master veneer until all the
planking will have some curve up toward the deck.
Use a long batten, lightly tacked to the hull, as a guide
for positioning the master horizontal veneer. Make sure
that the batten outlines a long, gentle arc with no flats
or hollows. After you have installed the first plank from
bow to stern, remove the batten and spile planking on
either side of it, using the master veneer as a guide for
alignment. To minimize both damage to your hull and
the number of staples you’ll need, use wood stapling
strips for the final layer of veneer. These strips should
be narrower than the veneer to reduce the chances they
will be bonded to the surface. As we pointed out
earlier, oozing epoxy may bond wood strips to your
hull, so a plastic barrier is a good safeguard.
244
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 21-22  The final layer of veneer is laid fore and aft on
this IOR 1⁄2–ton racer.

--- PAGE 259 ---
When you have completed the last veneer, laminate and
install a stem cap. Further layers of wood may be
needed to complete the keel profile. In most cases, you
can hold these in place with screws until the epoxy
cures. For extreme curves, use washers under the screw
heads for extra pressure. If this is not practical, make a
temporary form in the shape of the stem or keel,
allowing for a bit of springback, and laminate the part
on this. Then rough saw and bond the piece in position
for final fairing.
Final Fairing
Fairing is one of the arts of boatbuilding. We doubt that
anyone has ever built a perfectly fair hull, but we’ve
seen some that have been close to it. Up to a certain
point, fairness is a necessity because fair hulls offer less
resistance than hulls with humps and hollows. After
this, fairness is no longer important as far as movement
through the water is concerned, but becomes a point of
personal and professional pride.
You should usually complete final fairing and finishing
before you remove a laminated hull from its mold. The
exception to this is a thin-skinned hull, which needs
additional support from internal framework. In this
case, you would final fair the hull after installing the
framework.
Before final fairing, rough fair the last layer of veneer to
remove lumps of epoxy and obvious high spots as you
have on previous layers. Block or smoothing planes and
slightly flexible sanding blocks with 60 or 80-grit paper
are good tools for rough fairing. Don’t use air files and
other power machines to rough fair hulls that will be
naturally finished. Unless you have a lot of experience
with power tools, you run a high risk of leaving
scratches in the wood and these may show up in the
finished surface.
There are two parts to final fairing. The first, local
fairing, is the process of making the hull smooth to the
touch in a specific area. Overall fairing, the second job,
is more difficult. A hull may be sanded until it is very
smooth, but it still may not be fair overall. It’s usually at
this point that large overall hollows and bumps are
visible. It’s important that you do everything you can to
be sure of general fairness before you coat the hull
because it’s very difficult to correct overall fairness
problems after coating.
Final fairing involves finding high spots and removing
them so they blend in with the overall surface area. The
difficulty is in determining exactly where these high
spots are before you start planing or sanding. As you
work, continually move around and look at the hull
from different angles.
A chalk stick works quite well to help find high spots
and can be used to quickly identify them and check
your work. Make one from stock between 3⁄4" (18mm)
square and 11⁄4" (32mm) square, approximately 6' (2m)
long. Use the straightest wood available that will also
bend in a fair curve. Apply carpenter’s chalk to the
surfaces of the stick and bend it around the hull until
most of its surface area is firmly touching the hull.
Move the chalk stick back and forth slightly on the 
hull so that it deposits chalk on the high spots. Then
concentrate sanding and planing to bring these areas
down to fair. You can use the chalk stick as often as 
you like to monitor your progress until you are satisfied
with your hull’s fairness.
Always do your final fairing by hand, with 50 to 60-grit
paper attached to a block and hand planes with sharp,
fine-set blades. Sanding blocks should bend slightly to
conform to the contour of the hull. We make ours out
Chapter 21 – Laminating Veneer Over a Mold or Plug
245
Figure 21-23  This hull is being finish sanded in preparation
for epoxy coatings. Note the veneer seam along the bilge.
Topsides on this hull were choice veneers carried from the
sheer to just below the waterline.

--- PAGE 260 ---
of 3⁄8" to 1⁄2" (9mm to 12mm) plywood, although for
smaller, heavily curved hulls they may be as thin as 1⁄4"
(6mm). Our sanding blocks are designed for econom-
ical use of 11"  71⁄2" (279mm  190mm) sheets of
sandpaper: we cut them in multiples of 11", up to 44"
(1116mm) long. The width of the blocks is anywhere
from 3" to 33⁄4" (75mm to 95mm) to fit a sheet of
sandpaper cut in half lengthwise, and depends on
whether we want to attach paper to the block with
staples on the edge or with feathering disc adhesive on
the flat area. We prefer to use adhesive because more of
the sandpaper surface is exposed for use and it’s a little
faster to change paper. While a 44" block may not be
necessary in many cases, the 33" (840mm) block is a
minimum for achieving overall fairness on hulls 15'
(4.5m) and up.
If you plan to clear coat your hull, you will want to
avoid any deep sandpaper scratches, which may show
on its surface. When you get to the point where you
seem close to a final fairness, switch over to finer grit
paper. Begin to direct your sanding strokes in the 
direction of the grain rather than across it. When you
are satisfied with your work, do final sanding with a
shorter block. Work in the direction of the grain to
remove any cross-grain scratches.
Even within a species of wood, sanding can be done 
at different rates. Lower density wood can be sanded 
a little easier than higher density wood, and a single
piece of flat grain wood has hard and soft areas, which
can end up rippled after sanding. These factors can
contribute to slight, yet difficult-to-remedy, variations in
final fairing. Continued sanding sometimes only makes
matters worse, as it removes material from softer areas
and leaves slight “dishing” in the wood. When this
happens, the best solution is to sand with sharp paper,
changing it often, and to make liberal use of a block
plane with a sharp, fine-set blade. You can usually
avoid this whole problem, however, by choosing good,
uniform, edge-grain veneers for the last layer of a
laminated hull.
Removing the Hull from the Mold
Before you turn over the hull, make the cradles in which
it will sit. To fit cradles perfectly, cover the hull with
polyethylene and use it as a mold over which to laminate
veneer, plywood, or fiberglass. This is a very good use
of scrap veneer. Form two cradle seats, each 4" to 8"
246
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 21-24  A molded hull being lifted from a ribband mold.
The protective plastic sheet can be seen on the stern of the
mold.
Figure 21-25  The hull is in a cradle and immediately trued up
with the waterlines. Temporary bracing at the sheer stabilizes
the shape of the hull while interior joinery is installed. The
ladder at the open transom provides easy access to the
interior of the hull.

--- PAGE 261 ---
(100mm to 200mm) wide, which span at least 25% 
of the half girth. For clamping pressure as the epoxy
cures, use weights or cinch a line around the hull
roughly the way you’d cinch a saddle on a horse. When
the cradle seats have cured, bond sufficient framework
to them to permit the hull to sit close to its lines when
turned upright.
It’s fairly easy for a group of people to grasp a small,
light hull by its sheer and lift it high enough to clear 
its mold. If your hull is too heavy or has to be lifted 
too high for people to handle, use a lifting sling and
mechanical assistance. Usually, four pieces of extruded
metal U-shaped channel large enough to fit over the
edge of the hull at the sheer can be used as lifting
points. Each of the pieces might be a foot or more long
in order to distribute load over enough area to prevent
damage to the sheer. You may want to screw the pieces
to the sheer to prevent slipping. Attach a line to them
and fasten it to the lifting apparatus.
Lift the hull clear of its mold and set it on the floor.
Cross brace the sheers in a few places close to the
center of the hull so that they can bear the weight as
the hull rolls. Then roll it over into an upright position.
With enough people and padding, most molded hulls
can be rolled by hand. See Chapter 23 for suggestions
on rolling larger hulls.
Chapter 21 – Laminating Veneer Over a Mold or Plug
247

--- PAGE 262 ---
248
Hull Construction Methods

--- PAGE 263 ---
While still used in the construction of boats, stringer-frame construction is now most frequently seen in the
fabrication of male plugs for custom one-off composite hulls or fiberglass production molds.
In boatbuilding, this lightweight and efficient method of construction seems to have gravitated to closed
hulls or low-maintenance applications where the inherent nooks and crannies are not subject to wear and
tear or the accumulation of dirt and water.
The advantages and disadvantages of the stringer-frame
method for laminating hulls were discussed in the
overview of hull construction techniques in Chapter 5.
As we explained there, the stringer-frame system makes
a framework that holds the skin in position and column
to form a partial monococque structure. It eliminates the
need for a mold, permits the installation of bulkheads
and frames in the set-up, and produces hulls with
excellent strength- and stiffness-to-weight ratios. This
method is particularly well suited to building long,
narrow hulls with little compound curvature. The main
drawback of the stringer-frame system is that you must
begin laminating over a marginally adequate mold and
take great care as you install the first two layers of veneer.
Frames for Stringer-Frame Construction
Many combinations of stringers and frames are possible,
depending on the design, type, and use of the boat. The
most popular and perhaps easiest approach is to use
web frames and bulkheads through the entire set-up,
both of which can be quickly and accurately sawn from
commercial plywood. Later in this chapter, we describe
special I-beam framing which may be required in heavily
loaded areas.
Frames serve two purposes: they form a mold until the
hull is completed, and then they support the completed
hull. In the stringer-frame method of laminating, frames
are generally closer together than they are in the mold
or strip plank methods. This is because the stringer-
frame method uses relatively few longitudinal stringers
to support the laminating process, while the other two
methods use many stringers or planks. The long, narrow
hulls typically designed for multihulls require numerous
supporting web frames for rigidity and strength. In
monohulls, with their fuller shapes, the need for
supporting frames may not be as great, but a minimum
number are necessary to support a set-up during
building.
Web frames are cut from plywood, as opposed to
laminated or sawn frames, or plywood bulkheads. The
thickness and width of web frames vary widely according
to the structural needs of the hull. Since the alternating
grain of plywood veneers strengthens the frames in all
directions, it’s important to use balanced plywood with
at least five alternating plies. A 3-ply panel is usually
much stronger in the direction of the two plies than in
the direction of the middle layer. Even with balanced
panels, it’s important to lay out frames on the plywood
so that its grain direction provides the greatest strength
for a given frame shape.
With the stringer-frame method, there is always a risk
that a stringer may deform between frames during
laminating. Deflection of even 1⁄16" (1mm) presents
significant fairing problems when the hull is finished,
and 1⁄8" (3mm) of dimensional change could be a
disaster. Proper frame spacing and stringer size
minimize the possibilities of this sort of catastrophe.
The greatest distance between frames we’ve ever used
was 24" (600mm), with 18" (450mm) spacing being
more common. If your permanent frames don’t need to
be this close together in the completed hull, use some
temporary mold frames for molding support and
remove them after the skin is laminated.
With the stringer-frame method, as with the strip plank
method, you can position prefinished bulkheads, frames,
stem, keel and transom in the set-up with the tempo-
rary frames that are needed to support laminating. The
only real difference is that instead of fastening stringers
over the edges of the frames, as in the mold and strip
Stringer-Frame Construction
C H A P T E R
22

--- PAGE 264 ---
plank methods, you notch them into all of the frames
and bulkheads so that they are flush with the outer
edges of these parts. Stringers are also let into the back
of the stem, with their outer edges flush with the faired
stem surface. Layers of hull skin are bonded to all of
these parts and help to join them.
Stringers for Stringer-Frame Construction
Stringers, like frames, serve two functions. They, too,
form a reasonably substantial mold shape as the hull is
built and support it when it is finished. It’s difficult to
temporarily reinforce stringers for laminating, so mold
requirements supersede the requirements of the
completed hull. Chances are that you will end up using
more stringers than the structure actually needs in order
to have a decent mold. Stringers may, however, be
planed to smaller size after the hull skin has been
laminated.
The main requirement of a stringer is that it not bend
or deflect as veneer or plywood is bent around it during
laminating. To minimize distortion, we always set
stringers on edge, with the smaller dimension, or thick-
ness, touching the skin, while the larger dimension, or
depth, extends inward. A typical stringer for a 40'
(12.2m) boat is 11⁄2" (38mm) deep and 3⁄4" (18mm)
thick. We attach the 3⁄4" side to the skin and run the 11⁄2"
side towards the interior. This makes a T-section, which
gives the completed hull great stiffness and strength. If
the stringer was attached to the skin by its 11⁄2" side, it
would provide only about one third of the stiffness it
offers in the 3⁄4" dimension, and it would probably deform
during laminating. This might lead to an unfair hull.
Since you will be stapling veneer and plywood to the
edge of the stringer, it must be thick enough to permit
stapling without a lot of misses. Although it’s easy for a
staple to miss even a thick stringer and missed staples
can be removed before the next layer is applied, 3⁄4"
(18mm) is a practical stringer thickness for stapling. We
regularly, however, go down to 5⁄8" (15mm) with little
difficulty. Thinner stringers can be used, but may
require very time-consuming and exact measuring to
avoid misses.
Another consideration determining stringer size is the
ability of the stringer to bend around the most severe
curves in the hull shape. In certain situations, it may be
necessary to laminate stringers out of two or three pieces
to negotiate a curve. If so, use the set-up as a temporary
form on which to clamp and form the laminate until
the adhesive cures. Then remove the laminated stringer
from the set-up and prefinish it prior to reinstalling it
into the set-up. The laminated stringer has the big
advantage in that it is sure to be very stiff and will resist
deflection during the veneer laminating process.
Because of the variables involved, it is difficult to give
advice as to stringer size adequate to resist deflection
during laminating. Usually you can determine this for
yourself by creating a mock-up situation where you set
a given size stringer between two points that would
approximate the frame spacing. By bending some of
your laminate stock over this stringer, you can get a
general idea as to whether or not it will be adequate. As
a general guideline, a 11⁄2"  3⁄4" (38mm  18mm)
stringer is adequate for most laminating situations
when used on frame spacings up to 24" (600mm).
The next decision is the spacing of the stringer along
the frames. Initially it isn’t a question of how many
stringers are needed in the completed hull, but of the
minimum number of stringers necessary for proper
laminating to take place. Once again, the needs of the
hull structure and those of the mold are different.
The main factor that determines stringer spacing is the
shape of the hull itself. In areas with more curve, tighter
spacing of stringers may be needed to define the hull
shape properly, while flatter areas can rely on fewer
250
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 22-1 Rogue Wave’s main hull set-up with stringers
installed and ready for planking.

--- PAGE 265 ---
stringers. When using up to 3⁄16" (5mm) thick
laminating material, most stringers are spaced between
5" (130mm) and 8" (200mm) apart. If there are no
sharp curves, it is possible to use even wider spacing
than this, provided that thicker laminating material,
such as 1⁄4" (6mm) ply, is used. For structural purposes,
we have chosen our stringer spacings ranging between
ten to twenty times hull skin thickness. For instance,
stringers with 6" (150mm) spacing with a 1⁄2" (12mm)
laminated skin would result in a spacing of twelve times
skin thickness; a thinner 3⁄8" (9mm) skin with the same
stringer spacing would increase this ratio. Generally, it
pays to be a bit conservative on stringer spacing simply
because stringers don’t weigh very much and one or
two more stringers per side add very little weight to the
overall hull structure and can contribute measurably to
creating a better molding surface.
On long, slim hulls without great amounts of
compound curves, you can run stringers parallel to the
sheer in succeeding rows. These will eventually run out
at the keel in a curved arc. When the stringers are run
parallel with the sheer, it is possible to pre-notch all of
the frames prior to setting them up. This can save a
great deal of time in the long run because you can
notch much faster at the bench than later, after the
frames are set up. To do this, mark your standard
spacing up from the sheer clamp on each frame, estab-
lishing the position of each stringer as it crosses the
frame from the sheer all the way to the keel. Where it is
feasible, we suggest using the router jig shown in Figure
22-3 to precut notches in frames.
Chapter 22 – Stringer-Frame Construction
251
Figure 22-3 A router jig for notching frames and deck beams prior to set-up.
Figure 22-2  Frames set up for the proa Slingshot. In this
case, stringers for the bottom were marked off parallel from
the chine and run out toward the keel. The single topside
stringer was centered between the sheer and the chine.
Marks for
stringer notches
Router runs along
stops on jig
The cutter is set
to cut through plywood
C-clamps
(Quick action clamps
will vibrate loose 
during operation)
Stops for router (shim the faces
of the stops with masking tape
to fine tune this jig)
Stops for frame
and bulkhead
Dimensions for base
and stops depend on the
cutter and stringer size.
Stringer notchers
If the router 
is set up with a
template follower, then
the stips shown can be
omitted and the base 
modified for the follower

--- PAGE 266 ---
More compounded hull shapes will not lend themselves
to pre-notching prior to set-up, and the positioning of
the stringers will have to be done more in accordance
with the profile shape of the hull. Some hull shapes
have curves around which the stringers can best
negotiate at a given angle, and it is practicality that will
determine stringer positioning. This same problem
exists with the mold and strip plank methods. Here it is
potentially more difficult because the stringers will tend
to be larger, making them more difficult to bend than
either the strips or planking used in the other methods.
With heavily compounded shapes, it is also unlikely
that the stringers will run parallel to one another. They
will more likely taper toward each other as they go
toward the bow or the transom from the middle
spacing. This means that you may have to lay out each
stringer individually to divide up the areas of the hull
so that there is reasonably equidistant spacing between
stringers.
When spacing the stringers, pay special attention to any
unusually hard curves in the hull. For example, the
hard bulge created by the forward girth measurement
point in a typical IOR-rated ocean racer would be a
problem area. In order to develop this very tight curve
according to the designer’s lines, stringer placement is
extremely crucial. Usually, you need up to three
stringers to define such a tight curve properly, with the
central stringer being in the exact apex of the curve and
the other two being relatively close by to complete the
definition of the arc over which the laminating material
will follow. One of the problems caused by a hard bend
is the extra loading that is applied to the stringers
themselves. In this case, the central stringer takes all of
the bending load and will tend to bend inward, while
the stringers on either side that are holding the first
lamination in the curved position will tend to deflect
out when the lamination is attached to all three. If this
is a problem, it is possible to support the stringers
temporarily with supports from the floor or from the
frames on either side. Another solution is to divide the
bending load over two stringers rather than let one take
the total load; thus you would have four stringers doing
most of the work in defining a sharp bend, rather than
just three.
Notching Frames for Stringers
After you have set up the frames and laid out all the
stringer positions, verify the position marks for each
stringer with a batten for fairness. When you are satis-
fied with their placement, begin notching frames to
receive stringers.
For this operation, we make up a marking gauge or fid,
as shown in Figure 22-5. This is nothing more than a
3" (75mm) or 4" (100mm) long piece of the stringer
stock we’re using, with a slightly longer piece of
plywood attached to the edge which ultimately faces
the skin. The plywood pad extends a couple of inches
beyond the stringer piece. In order to outline the
stringer on a frame, we set the fid with the pad resting
on the true edge of the set-up frame and the sample
stringer flush against its side. It’s important to make the
gauge accurately so that the stringer mark is perfectly
square to the immediate perimeter of the frame on
which it rests. We always mark stringer positions on all
the frames (surmarks) with the stringer outline either
above or below the mark on every frame. In other
words, never draw the surmarked position to the
centerline of the stringer, but indicate that the mark is
either the top or the bottom edge of the stringer.
252
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 22-4 Two section views through planking and
stringers in the bilge area.
Section through planking and
stringers in “hard” bilge area.
Pressure from the
planking forces the bilge
stringer in and tends to
force the stringers on
either side out
Solution is to increase the
number of stringers in
these high load areas

--- PAGE 267 ---
When you have marked all of the stringer outline
positions, you can begin notching. Many methods are
used to notch frames to accept stringers. The simplest is
to use a handsaw to saw along the sides of the marked
notch down to and flush with the bottom of the notch.
Make several more saw cuts in the center of the stock
left in between the notch markings down to the bottom
baseline. Then use a sharp chisel to cut along the
bottom of the mark in the slot on each side of the frame
until you remove all material in the slot area. Until you
get good with the saw, start by cutting the slots slightly
undersize and then file them out by hand to a snug fit
with the stringer. Use a sample piece of stringer to
check your notches. You can speed up the notching
operation with the use of power tools, such as a recip-
rocating saber saw or a power circular saw with the
blade set to the proper depth. We would advise caution
in the use of either of these tools, however, because you
need experience to perform accurate cuts.
Fitting and Fairing Stringers
An advantage of the stringer-frame method is that
frames only need rough fairing as you set up. You can
bevel and final fair the frames when you install the
stringers. The stringers act as fairing battens: you can
adjust them in and out of their notches to compensate
for a frame which is too low or high at any point. If, as
an example, a stringer makes a hard spot in one frame,
correct it by filing its notch a little deeper until it lies
fair. If, on the other hand, a stringer looks flat on a
frame, shim it up in its notch with a small wedge.
During the process of fitting and fairing stringers in
their notches, you will also fit the ends of the stringer to
the stem and transom. You can cut triangular notches in
the stem and fit stringers into them. We often notch
stringers into the back of the stem lamination and then
use triangular plywood breasthook-like gussets to make
a triangular joint with the stringers on either side of the
hull. With either method, fit the stringer at the stem
and then set it into the notched frames working aft
from the bow.
We usually notch stringers into a partial transom. Then,
when the hull has been laminated, we add layers to the
transom. We notch the partial transom and slip stringers
into it in the same way we do with frames. However, if
you have a full transom, you may want to cut triangular
Chapter 22 – Stringer-Frame Construction
253
Figure 22-5 A marking gauge or fid.
Figure 22-6  Fitting stringers to a stem or stern post.
Small section
of stringer
Thin plywood pad
Marking fid used
to mark or clean
stringer notches
Stringers set 
into triangular
notches in the
stem
Stem
Plywood breast hook

--- PAGE 268 ---
notches in it as you did the bow so that the end grain
of the stringers is not exposed.
When you have temporarily installed all of the stringers
and they lie fair, mark them at various points so that
you can remove them in preparation for final assembly.
If you have not already done so, round off the exposed
interior stringer edges between the frames, and sand
and coat them. Prefinishing individual parts before they
are installed is particularly important with this
laminating method because a stringer-frame interior is
difficult to coat and sand adequately later on.
Before reinserting stringers, apply a thick, high-density
epoxy mixture to the inside edges of all of the stringer
slots in the frames. It is not necessary to apply epoxy to
prefinished stringers before installing them, although in
some situations coating both surfaces ensures better
contact. If you have cut the notches carefully and the
stringers fit snugly, you will need very little outside help
to keep the joints together until the adhesive cures.
Usually, a few staples or a couple of clamps in the right
places on each stringer will hold it in position. On
permanent frames, remove all adhesive which has
squeezed out of the joints. We sometimes use this
excess epoxy mixture to make small fillets between the
stringers and frames to increase the bonding area.
In areas where the stringer is notched into a temporary
frame, don’t put adhesive in the notch because later
you will want to remove the temporary frame without
damaging the stringer. If the notch in the temporary
frame fits tightly around the stringer, probably nothing
else will be needed to hold the stringer in proper
position. However, if it is a sloppy fit, further position
the stringer with some fine wedges driven between 
the stringer and the gap that might exist on either
side. In some cases, we have also used a small fillet,
which we later chisel away, to hold a stringer rigidly
to a temporary frame.
When all of the stringers are permanently installed, begin
a final fairing of the entire hull surface. It is now very
easy to bevel the frames, using the installed stringers as
guides to achieve perfect bevels from frame to frame. If
you have made any mistakes and have humps and
hollows that need correction, these are still easy to take
care of. Correct an offending high stringer or frame by
planing it away until it fairs in with the rest of the hull.
Correct stringers or frames that have low spots by
laminating on a layer of 1⁄8" (3mm) veneer or plywood
and later fairing this addition in with the rest of the hull.
To the uninitiated, fairing intermittent stringers may
seem difficult because most of the hull surface is still
open space. With the strip plank or mold method, it is
254
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 22-7 Fairing the molds on a stringer-frame set-up.
Figure 22-8 Stringers may be shifted slightly to facilitate
bending, fitting or bonding.

--- PAGE 269 ---
a little easier to sight along the hull because you are
dealing with a solid surface that offers more telltale signs
of humps and hollows that might be present. With the
stringer-frame method, the planing that you do on one
stringer or one frame affects a large surface area in
determining hull fairness. A good fairing batten and
careful eyeballing will help you to achieve good overall
fairness. Develop athwartship fairness by running the
fairing battens at diagonal angles, as well as right angles,
to the stringers. Check longitudinal fairness by sighting
along your permanent stringers. In any areas of possible
irregularity, clamp a large batten onto the offending
stringer to see if it is, in fact, bending fair according to
the batten. The favored tools for final fairing operations
are a small hand-held block plane, a smoothing plane
(keep both fine set and very sharp), and an 11" (280mm),
flat wood sanding block with 50-grit sandpaper.
I-Beam Frames
With the stringer-frame system, it’s possible to build a
permanent, I-beam-type frame. The benefit of doing
this is that it can greatly stiffen the hull locally while
taking up little interior space. This type of framing is
not usually required throughout a hull, but it can be
very useful in an area of hard curves. We sometimes use
it, too, for deck construction.
The I-beam frame has three parts: the load-bearing skin
of the hull, a core composed of lightweight wood
blocking, and an interior load-bearing lamination. The
blocking is inserted between stringers in the area of the
frame. The lamination, which is formed in place over
the stringers, is placed over stringers and bonded to the
blocking. The sizes of blocking and lamination can be
adjusted to handle anticipated loads. Because it is rarely
subjected to high loading, we usually saw the blocking
from low-density wood stock, such as cedar, spruce, 
or pine.
One way to build an I-beam frame is to insert the
blocking between the stringers after final fairing of the
stringers but before laminating the hull skin. We suggest
fitting and bonding the blocking between stringers flush
on the interior and protruding enough past the hull
profile for easy fairing for the planking. If you wait until
after the hull is completed and then try to fit the blocking
from the interior, the job is much more difficult.
We usually do not install any blocking until the set-up
has been finally faired. This way, we only have to fair it
into the stringers to which it’s attached. The blocking
should also be faired smooth with the stringers on the
inside surface to produce an even surface over which to
laminate the third part of the I-beam. We make up and
permanently install this piece before laminating the hull
surface. (See Figure 22-9)
A second way to form an I-beam frame is shown in
Figure 22-10. With this technique, saw a web frame
flush with the interior of the stringers, let the remaining
plywood serve as blocking, and add a laminated frame
to the interior. This will result in an I-beam that is
probably stronger than the original web frame but takes
up less room.
To make a plywood web frame into an I-beam, fit and
cut notches in the frame. Then saw starter cuts about 
2" (50mm) long on either side of each notch. Start each
cut at the deepest part of the slot and run it parallel to
the planking towards the next stringer. When you have
finished laminating the hull, check the lines to be sure
they are parallel to the planking, and then use a keyhole
saw to connect them and cut away the excess frame.
Chapter 22 – Stringer-Frame Construction
255
Figure 22-9 Making an I-beam frame by inserting blocking
between stringers.
Stringers
Spruce or cedar
blocking, rough sawn
to shape and fit to
stringers
Blocking scribed parallel
to the planking and faired
to accept the laminated
cap for the frame
Blocking faired
to stringers to
accept planking
Planking

--- PAGE 270 ---
Use a spokeshave on the sawn plywood surface to fair it
in with the interior stringer edges and bond the interior
lamination in position.
Laminating on the Set-Up
The stringer-frame method offers a unique manufac-
turing opportunity: the stringers in the completed
set-up can be used as a jig over which to laminate
frames, interior sections of I-beam frames, keel floors,
and any other parts which must be formed to the shape
of the hull.
To laminate on the set-up, begin with rather thin, easily
bent stock. Apply adhesive to all the strips needed for
the lamination and wrap the pile in 4 or 6 mil polyeth-
ylene sheet so that it can be handled without spreading
epoxy on the set-up, framework, clamps, or workers.
Clamp the stack to stringers in the area desired, adding
several clamps between stringers for constant pressure
to the laminate. We usually set up laminations as close
as possible to frames so the stringers will be better
supported and will not deflect under the pressure. If
possible, choose a spot in the set-up with a little tighter
curve than the piece you are laminating actually needs
to have to compensate for springback.
As you laminate, take care to avoid damaging stringers
and other parts of the set-up with clamps or epoxy.
Cover vulnerable areas with masking tape and polyeth-
ylene sheet and use small plywood clamping pads to
protect wooden parts. When the lamination has cured,
remove it from the plastic and plane it to the shape and
size desired. Final fit the part for positioning in the hull
and prefinish it before installation.
The First Lamination
Before laminating the hull skin over the completed
stringer-frame assembly, carefully analyze the interior to
identify operations that might be performed more
efficiently now than when the hull is finished. The
stringer-frame method requires that more attention be
paid to this because the cluttered interior surface makes
fitting interior items difficult. Laminated keel floors and
frames, centerboard boxes, daggerboard trunks, and
interior furniture items are possibilities. Bunks, cabinets,
and other interior items are sometimes installed before
the skin is laminated because they can be more quickly
fit to and faired in with the overall set-up. The alterna-
tive is to fit these items later to a curved interior hull
surface complicated with stringers and frames.
256
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 22-10 Making an I-beam frame by cutting away a
web frame.
Figure 22-11  Laminating floors over stringers. To ease the
job of laminating and installing floor timbers, it was done
before the topside stringers were installed.
1) Notch the frame for
stringers.
2) Scribe the frame
parallel to the planking
and cut about 2"
either side of the
stringer notch. Use a
saber saw if possible,
cutting as in the detail.
3) This will leave the “bottom”
of the notch at the correct
depth for the stringers.
4) After the boat has
been planked, check or
rescribe the frame
parallel to the
planking.
5) Saw along the 
scribe line out from
the notches. This will probably require 
a coping saw, although a small 
panel saw will work in flat areas.
6) Clean up the sawn edge of the
web and prepare the surface
for a cap.
7) Bond the
hardwood cap.
Cut out 
from the
notch –
leave the
bottom of
the
notch
1
2
3
4
7
3
5
6
Cutting the
frames away
after the planking
is completed allows
you to use the wide
web frame as a more
effective mold. Pre-cutting
the frames out from the
notches a few inches eases
the cutting and finishing work
after the stringers and planking
are installed.
Note: The cap is
structural, so
exercise care in
choosing the stock
and scantling 
size. We have used
1⁄2" x 11⁄2" white ash
for this. Mahogany
or fir, 1⁄2" x 11⁄2", are
good choices.
stringer

--- PAGE 271 ---
Several almost-complete interiors have been installed
before any hull laminating, although in most cases this
may not be possible. By comparison, the smooth
interiors possible with the mold or strip plank methods
are easier to fit and join to than stringer-frame interiors.
The main purpose of the first lamination with the
stringer-frame method is to provide an initial mold
surface over which further laminations can take place.
This first lamination can be either plywood or veneer.
However, we much prefer plywood for this first layer
for a number of reasons. Because the mold, at this
point, must be considered inadequate, it is important to
use the most stable laminating material available for the
first layer to achieve a solid and fair surface for further
lamination. Plywood, because it is composed of at least
three plies, is much more dimensionally stable in all
directions than is veneer. Plywood also has the advan-
tage that it already has sanded surfaces, which are easily
prefinished.
This is not to say that veneer cannot be successfully
used; we have used it many times, as have many other
builders. However, veneer does require a higher degree
of skill. This is mainly due to the difficulty of control-
ling the unsupported edges of the veneer between the
stringers. (They tend to curl one way or the other,
requiring remedial action by the builder.) The stability
of plywood makes prefinishing of the interior surface
prior to installation practical, saving a good deal of
interior finishing time later on. However, because of its
unstable surface, we do not recommend that veneer be
prefinished prior to application. The only advantages of
veneer are that it may be a little bit lighter than plywood
and is decidedly less expensive; however, these advan-
tages are greatly overshadowed by the extra work
veneer requires on the first layer. With the second layer,
veneers again become the preferred laminating material.
Since the object of the first layer is to make an adequate
mold, you should apply the thickest layer of plywood
you can for the stiffest possible mold surface. To help
develop stiffness, run this first layer the shortest
distance across the stringers, usually 90° to the stringer
direction. The reasons for doing this are clear: if
stringers are set at 6" (150mm) spacing and the first
layer of ply is installed at a 45° angle to them, 9"
(225mm) of wood grain will remain unsupported;
while if the plywood grain runs at right angles to the
stringers, there will only be 6" (150mm) of unsup-
ported wood fiber and the mold will be stiffer. The
structural needs of the hull and the specifics of the
building situation may make the ideal 90° angle
impractical for your project, in which case you will
have to make the best compromise you can.
Preparing Plywood Panels for the 
First Lamination
Using plywood for laminating poses an economic
problem in the high waste caused by the limited 8'
(2400mm) lengths in which plywood sheets are sold.
We overcome this problem by sawing bevels on both
ends of a 4'  8' (1200mm  2400mm) sheet of
plywood and then sawing the plywood into panels of
the width desired for laminating. We next scarf together
the individual panels, making plywood panels
sometimes up to 40' (12.2mm) long from which we can
cut proper laminating lengths. (See Chapter 12 for
proper scarfing technique.) By taking measurements on
the hull with a tape measure, we determine the panel
length needed within a few inches and then rough cut
this length from the long, scarfed panel. The result is
minimal (less than 5%) waste of plywood. With the 
Chapter 22 – Stringer-Frame Construction
257
Figure 22-12 Positioning the sheer clamp and topside
stringers after installing laminated floors, blocking and the
first layer of plywood planking on the bottom.

--- PAGE 272 ---
high cost of plywood, the extra time required for
scarfing usually pays big dividends.
After the scarf joints are completed, sand smooth the
joining edges on both sides using either power or hand
tools. Then precoat and sand all of the panels on one
side prior to cutting to length and assembling them on
the stringer-frame surface. While you can precoat the 
4'   8'  (1200mm  2400mm) sheet of plywood
more quickly before you make the scarf joints and saw
the panels into the desired width, this creates problems
in that you must then make the scarf joints with great
precision because the prefinished epoxy surface is more
difficult to fair up to correct any minor misalignment.
The maximum plywood thickness that may be used in
the first layer is determined by the hull curvature
around which the panel will bend. Most hulls require
plywood between 1⁄8" (3mm) and 1⁄4" (6mm) thick, with
5⁄32" (4mm) and 3⁄16" (4mm) most commonly used.
The important thing to remember when choosing a
thickness is that 1⁄4" (6mm) plywood is about eight times
stiffer than 1⁄8" (3mm) plywood and therefore much
more difficult to bend over tight curves. Precoating with
WEST SYSTEM® epoxy will add to the stiffness and resist-
ance to bending of a thin plywood panel. You might just
make a radius with a given thickness of bare ply but
have the same piece break when you bend it around the
same curve after it’s been coated. With most of the hull
area, this is not likely to be a problem, but there may be
very tight spots where it’s best to leave the wood
uncoated to help in bending.
We have used one trick to bend a 3-ply panel around
particularly sharp local curves without reducing its
thickness. We scarf in a length of plywood with its
grain running opposite the normal direction in the area
of the curves and leave this section uncoated so that it
bends more easily. Later, coating both surfaces with
epoxy will substantially improve the strength and stiff-
ness of a “wrong way” piece.
Installing the First Layer
For a more thorough discussion of stapling techniques,
spiling, applying epoxy, and installing veneers, see
Chapter 21. It would be helpful to familiarize yourself
with this material before proceeding.
Assuming that you are applying the first layer at right
angles to the stringers, start the master panel at a central
location, as you would with the other hull laminating
methods. Temporarily position it and mark its outline
on the stringers and frames it covers. Apply a thick,
high-density epoxy mixture to all stringers, frames,
blocking, stem, and keel surfaces which come into
contact with this first panel. The adhesive should be so
thick that it bridges any gaps and, more importantly,
does not run down any parts as it oozes from the joints.
Use either wide-crown staples, which must be removed
unless they are plastic, or narrow-crown alloy staples,
which can remain in place, to hold the plywood in
position until the adhesive cures. Staples that don’t
have to be extracted are faster, but they cost more and
narrow crown staples are more difficult to pull out
when you miss a stringer. Insert the first staples at the
edges of the panel where the stringers are easily visible.
Then draw an accurate mark across the plywood panel
to outline the exact locations of stringers for stapling
within the panel.
With the stringer-frame method, proper spiling and
fitting of the first layer are important for both aesthetic
and structural reasons. The edges of the panels must be
glued together to help form a rigid mold surface. They
must fit well, and they should align themselves
correctly between stringers where there is no support.
The lay of the plywood strip is absolutely crucial to
edge alignment. Pushing one edge of the ply in the
wrong direction will result in pressures within the strip,
258
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 22-13 Coating 40'  1' (1200mm  2400mm) panels
of planking stock. Scarfing together long lengths of planking
stock like these cuts down on scrap rate.

--- PAGE 273 ---
which will cause it to curl its edge away from its
neighbor. Spiling can be relatively easy with this
method for laminating hulls. Overlap the plywood
panels slightly as you hold them in temporary position.
Mark and scribe them from inside the hull, leaving
small gaps in the marking where stringers are in the
way. Use this line only for rough cutting because the
overlap raises one panel edge higher than the other and
the panels do not lie flush with the hull.
You can also use filler spiling systems with the stringer-
frame method. Apply unspiled plywood panels at
intervals down the hull as if you were using the
mechanical spiling system described in Chapter 21. The
gaps between panels should be just slightly smaller than
the width of the panels that you are applying.
Temporarily tack a standard width panel over a gap and
mark both its edges for cutting and fitting from inside
the hull. The advantage is that the filler panel overlaps
the installed plywood panels on either side of it and lies
reasonably true to the hull surface.
With the filler spiling system just discussed, you should
begin final fitting in the middle of the panel. Plane the
midsection edges of the filler panel so that it fits snugly
in place and then work the ends of the panel in place,
using a hand block plane lightly to remove material so
that the panel will lie in best position and the edges will
align properly. With the mold method, a “wild” edge
can be tamed by applying enough staples to hold it in
place until the adhesive cures. With the stringer
method, you have nothing to staple to and can only rely
on finessing the plywood panels into proper position so
that the edges will line up by themselves.
The main disadvantage of the stringer-frame system is
the extraordinary amount of time that you must spend
in carefully fitting this very crucial first layer. We can’t
say forcefully enough, however, that taking the time to
make sure that all of the edges between the plywood
panels are not only well fit, but are properly lined and
bonded with each other will save a great amount of
time later on.
To edge glue the panels, use a well-thickened high-
density epoxy mixture on both of the edges to be
joined. A small brush or flat stick works well for
applying the appropriate amount of epoxy, which
depends on the quality of the fit, directly to the edges.
The difficult part here is matching the edges without
getting epoxy all over the place. It’s not so bad when
you are applying epoxy to just one edge, but doing two
edges at a time with the filler spiling system can be a bit
messy.
After the plywood panels are stapled down, you will
find that even with proper fitting and positioning, there
will be some misalignment of edges that will need to be
corrected before the adhesive cures. Most edge
misalignment is minor, requiring very little pressure to
correct. There are two basic methods used to solve this
problem, both of which first require removing any
excess adhesive from the edge joint areas on both the
exterior and interior surfaces. The first method uses
short staples and small scrap pieces of plywood that
might measure 1"  2" (25mm  50mm). Place the
plywood pads directly in the area where misalignment
is occurring. Position a staple through the plywood pad
into the low side of the misaligned edges, drawing it up
flush with the other edge. The staples should be short
enough so that they will not protrude through the
interior surface of this first lamination. (Use any
number of these little plywood pads and staples
wherever necessary.)
The second method is designed to solve more difficult
alignment situations where maximum pressure is
needed to bring the two ply edges into proper align-
Chapter 22 – Stringer-Frame Construction
259
Figure 22-14  Stapling the first layer of planking to the
topsides. Note the laminated curved frame and blocking in the
upper right as well as limber holes cut in stringers next to
blocking.

--- PAGE 274 ---
ment. This method uses two opposing plywood pads
approximately 11⁄2" (38mm) square. Drill a hole approx-
imately the shank size of a number 8 screw on the pad
to be used on the outside of the first lamination, and
then drill a smaller pilot hole for a number 8 screw on
the pad for the inside. Put a number 8 sheet metal
screw with a washer through the outside pad through a
hole drilled in the gap between the two misaligned
edges of plywood to the inner pad, and screw both
pads up tight until the edges are aligned. (There may or
may not be a gap present between the plywood edges
for misalignment to occur.) This is a foolproof solution,
but requires more time and energy than the staple
method, and we only use it when absolutely necessary.
With either method, use polyethylene sheet material or
wax paper between the plywood tabs and the edges to
prevent bonding between the two. However, even
without protection, it is not a particularly difficult job
to remove the plywood tabs with an offset chisel.
An attractive alternative to the staple and drill approach
in places where it does not take much force to align
panel edges is to hold the plywood scraps in place with
hot melt glue. Just apply a bead to hot melt to the scrap
plywood pad, press it in place at the same time making
sure the panel edges are aligned, wait a few seconds for
the hot melt to harden, and move to the next spot.
After the epoxy cures, a sharp chisel can be easily
forced between the plywood scraps and the hull
without damaging the hull. If you can get by with this
method, cleanup of epoxy squeezed out on the inside
of the hull is simplified greatly because the plywood
alignment pads are all applied to the outside of the hull.
Another factor affecting edge alignment is the width of
the plywood panel that is chosen. If a panel is too wide
for the amount of compound curve present in the hull,
the edges will tend to curl excessively between stringers.
This not only contributes to edge alignment problems,
but also can cause extra work when fairing up prior to
installing the second layer. The desire is always there to
use as wide a width as you can get away with so as to
save some labor in fitting time by reducing the number
of joints. However, with this method, it is better to be a
bit more conservative and use narrower panels than
you might choose for the mold or the strip plank
method. This might actually save time in the long run
by reducing the labor needed to align the edges and fair
the first lamination surface.
The first lamination of plywood is usually joined at the
centerline along the keel, but this is not necessary if it
would be advantageous—and the hull shape allows it—
to join in another area, such as at a bilge stringer. As
the panels run out at the transom, stem, and sheer
areas, allow a slight overlap of approximately 1"
(25mm) when trimming the ply so that you can
laminate subsequent layers slightly beyond the actual
hull. This will ensure good laminating pressure and a
lack of voids in the completed hull when the edges are
trimmed. Take extra care when bonding this first layer
to the stem, keel, and sheer. These are the critical joints
in any boat: proper application of the first lamination to
these members is always important.
Cleanup
If you want to achieve a nice looking, natural interior
with the stringer-frame method of construction, proper
cleanup is extremely important and, unfortunately,
time-consuming. As plywood panels are installed over
the stringer-frame support system, you must clean up
the excess adhesive that exudes from the joints on the
interior before it fully cures. Again, we must emphasize
that the adhesive used should be thick enough so it will
not run down the stringers or the plywood skin as it
squeezes out from the joints because of the added
cleanup difficulties this causes. It is not necessary that
you remove the adhesive immediately; in fact, it is even
a little easier to remove after it has started to stiffen or
begun an initial cure. In this initial phase, the adhesive
gets considerably thicker, losing some of its ability to
adhere to other surfaces, and in this state it is easiest to
remove. If you allow the cure to go beyond this state,
removal of the adhesive becomes increasingly difficult
and is all but impossible when the epoxy reaches a
semi-rigid state. Depending on the temperature that
you are working in and the cure rates you are getting
with your epoxy mixture, you should plan your work
so that you clean up at given intervals during the
laminating process. If two or more people are applying
the plywood strips on the exterior surface, interior
cleanup can require the services of one person full time
to keep up.
260
Hull Construction Methods

--- PAGE 275 ---
Cleanup is simpler and more efficiently done on prefin-
ished interior surfaces. You can remove most of the
excess adhesive that squeezes out of a joint using an 
1" (25mm) wide putty knife or a squared-off and sharp-
ened piece of flat stick (such as a tongue depressor) that
is approximately 1" wide. Deposit the excess adhesive
into a pot as it is removed from the joint, scraping the
blade edge reasonably clean on the lip of the pot.
Occasionally, wipe the implement with paper towel and
solvent to remove excess adhesive that is starting to cure.
For the final cleaning operation, use a good solvent.
Wash joint areas with a solvent-soaked white paper
towel to remove excess adhesive and to smooth out any
leftover epoxy so you won’t have to sand it later. Excess
epoxy will mix with the solvent in the paper towel. This,
combined with the wiping action, leaves the surface
smoother than if it were sanded. Many solvents,
including denatured alcohol and lacquer thinner, work
well. Take appropriate precautions to protect your
hands and prevent inhalation of solvent fumes. Take
care to dispose of uncured epoxy-solvent-soaked rags
to prevent a fire hazard.
During the cleanup operation, you will want to make
sure that the gaps between the plywood panels are well-
filled and relatively smooth. Sometimes the gaps may be
so wide that the final wiping operation will remove too
much epoxy from the gap area. When this happens,
trowel some adhesive into the joint, allowing any excess
to exude through onto the exterior surface, and then
rely on hand sanding after the filler has cured to
smooth up the interior surface area around the joint. It
is important to check the edge joints between the
panels carefully because any gaps that are left unfilled
can become potential points for epoxy to bleed through
and run down into the interior when you apply the
second layer.
When the first lamination is completed and the epoxy
has cured, remove all alignment pads and temporary
staples to prepare for rough fairing. Do this as you would
on any other hull but use sharp hand planes instead of
sanding tools because the stringer-frame surface will be
somewhat springier than the steadier surfaces produced
by other methods. The first layer of a stringer-frame
hull sometimes resists good fairing with a sanding block,
but its springiness doesn’t affect fairing with a sharp
smoothing or block plane.
It’s not unusual to find some low spots that need filling.
Mix low-density filler and epoxy to make a sandable
fairing putty, and use this to fill these areas and any
other voids. Take special care with voids that go all the
way through to the first layer: Fill them so that adhesive
cannot seep through to the interior when you apply the
second lamination.
Applying the Second Layer
When you have rough faired the first layer and are ready
to apply the second, be sure that all stringer locations
are marked on the outside of the first layer so you will
know exactly where to staple. We generally mark
stringers on each panel as we install it, and most of
these marks survive rough fairing.
Before applying the second layer, give the first layer a
coating of WEST SYSTEM epoxy to add stiffness and make
it a more rigid surface for stapling. Allow this to cure;
then lightly sand with a light-duty polisher and foam
disc pad. Remove sanding dust with a damp cloth. The
coated surface also has better staple holding power, and
this helps you develop more pressure as you install the
second layer. A final benefit is that you will now have to
apply epoxy only to the bonding surface of the second
layer, rather than to both the first and second layers.
This saves some time and a good deal of mess.
We generally apply a bit more adhesive to the second
lamination than normal to try to make up for two
possible deficiencies. The first layer will not have the
high-quality fairness achieved with the mold and strip
plank methods, so we rely on thickened epoxy to fill
some of the voids and hollows which may be present.
The second and more difficult problem is that only
limited pressure can be applied to some areas of the
hull as the second layer is installed. This means that the
epoxy applied to the second layer should be free
flowing, not too thick but able to fill voids. We use low-
density filler mixed with epoxy to a thick consistency.
In areas where we anticipate major voids, we apply
large quantities of thickened epoxy to both the first and
second layers to ensure that gaps will be filled.
Chapter 22 – Stringer-Frame Construction
261

--- PAGE 276 ---
You can do the second lamination with veneers instead
of plywood with no difficulties. The general instability
of the veneers is no longer a problem due to the fact
that you now have a reasonable mold surface to staple
to. Begin the second lamination in normal fashion by
placing the master veneer in the central area of the hull
at whatever diagonal angle you desire. Position
succeeding layers of veneer on either side of this
master, using either the hand or mechanical spiling
system for fitting the edges. The only thing that is
different from standard procedure is the stapling
method used to bond this second lamination to the first
lamination.
The areas where the stringers and frames are supporting
the first lamination are the only really solid points on
the mold surface and you need to utilize them well
when bonding the second lamination to the first.
After you have positioned the veneer and attached it at
the sheer clamp, keel, stem, transom, and all other
solid points, then deal with areas between these
members. To apply adequate pressure to these spots,
use staples that are short enough so they don’t
penetrate the interior and leave holes which will need
filling. If your first lamination was 5⁄32" (4mm) plywood
and your second layer is 1⁄8" (3mm) veneer, you can
successfully use 1⁄4" (6mm) long wide-crown staples to
achieve reasonable pressure without stapling into the
interior. Because the springiness of the mold will not
permit countersinking, all of these in-between staples
will have to be removed. Use scrap veneer or plastic
stapling strips to save time. If your staples are too long
and break through the inner surface, adjust the depth
of penetration by using thicker stapling strip material or
by doubling standard plastic banding.
The best way to insert shorter staples in springy areas is
to hold the staple gun with firmer-than-normal pressure
on the veneer surface. The extra pressure helps the staple
sink itself to the crown for maximum clamping
between the two layers. Remember that you are
applying the pressure and all the staple does is maintain
it. If you hold the staple gun too lightly, the staples will
not reach proper depth and will not have adequate
holding power. If the stringers are relatively close and
there is a fair amount of curve in the hull surface, you
may need very few staples between them because the
veneers themselves will develop sufficient bonding
pressure.
You can generally tell whether a veneer is lying tight
enough for good bonding by pressing it with your
fingers in any suspect area during the laminating
process. Any gaps between the veneers will move in
and out with light finger pressure. Gaps are also likely
to make a slight noise as the excess epoxy moves
around. When in doubt, staple; no boat ever suffered
from too many staples, but there have been a few
which suffered from voids.
Depending upon the spacing of the stringers, we
usually apply two to three short staples along all of the
edges of the veneers where they meet between the
stringers. These are usually the last staples applied in
the lamination; this gives excess epoxy a chance to
work its way out of the center areas of the veneer
toward the edges before we apply pressure at this edge
point. Sometimes there may be a wild edge or a warp
in the veneer that fails to come down in position with
the limited pressure that a short staple can apply. Solve
this problem by having someone temporarily hold a
small wood block on the interior side of the tw