 need. Some of
them, particularly some hand tools, are indispensable.
Others have been chosen because we are professionals,
Tools and the Boatshop
C H A P T E R
8

--- PAGE 74 ---
and it is important that we cut down on labor. From
the discussion of tools and their uses which follows,
you should be able to decide what you will need for
your project.
Bear several things in mind as you assess your tool
requirements. Most pieces of equipment are sold
in various qualities for professionals and hobbyists.
Heavy-duty power tools are substantially more expen-
sive than home shop models, but break down less
frequently and last longer. Hand tools, too, come in
different grades. The best way to find out what tools
and what grade equipment you need is to get into
your job. Check tool company catalogs for the best
prices and invest your dollars wisely.
As professional builders, we can amortize large power
tool expenditures over many projects. Tool reliability is
a major consideration in our selection process because
downtime due to malfunctions can be expensive. We
are therefore willing to pay a premium for equipment
that will hold up through a lot of abuse.
Most amateurs have different criteria for choosing their
inventories. You will put less wear and tear on your
power equipment if you only use it to build one boat
a year. If your electric drill breaks down, you can
probably move on to another job until it’s fixed. Given
the relative costs of different tool grades, the possibility
of slight inconvenience doesn’t really justify your
buying top quality industrial tools. Less expensive
models will serve you well.
Hand tools are a slightly different matter. We suggest
that you do as we do and buy the best chisels and
planes that you can find.
Keep your tools sharp and let yourself enjoy handling
them. Cured epoxy is harder than the wood for which
good edge tools were intended, so you may occasion-
ally want to protect your investment by using a few
lower-quality, disposable pieces. Purchase good clamps
because they will save you a great deal of frustration.
A small boatbuilding project can go smoothly with a
small inventory of hand tools and some basic safety
equipment. Figure 8-1 shows a minimal, economical
collection of tools. It would be impractical to do
without these even on an 8' (2.4m) pram.
Figure 8-2 illustrates a broader inventory, which will get
you through a project more comfortably. You might
consider beginning with the tools in Figure 8-1
and buying more as you need them. All of these
tools are available at hardware stores.
60
Getting Started
Figure 8-2 Broader small tool inventory: (A) crosscut saw;
(B) back saw; (C) coping saw; (D) large set spade bits;
(E) large drill bit assortment; (F) electric saber saw; (G) awl;
(H) spokeshave; (I) plumb bob; (J) jack plane; (K) bench
or smoothing plane; (L) Surform™ tool; (M) offset chisel;
(N) chisel assortment; (O) file and rasp assortment;
(P) protractor; (Q) calipers; (R) dividers; (S) whetstone.
Figure 8-1  Minimal small tool inventory: (1) combination
square; (2) 24-inch level; (3) scissors; (4) sliding bevel or bevel
square; (5) basic drill bit assortment; (6) spade drill bits as
needed; (7) electric drill motor; (8) block plane; (9) compass;
(10) 25-foot tape measure; (11) chalk line; (12) hammer; (13)
screwdrivers; (14) rasp; (15) utility knife; (16) keyhole saw;
(17) chisel; (18) staple removing tool; (19) staple gun.

--- PAGE 75 ---
Construction with WEST SYSTEM epoxy requires a few
specialized tools, some of which can be purchased and
others made in the shop. Syringes, rollers, squeegees,
pans, and cups are available in most hardware stores or
through WEST SYSTEM dealers. Instructions for making
other useful gadgets are provided throughout this book.
Three or four well-chosen hand-held power tools will
make your work easier and cut down on the need for
major equipment. A saber saw is a little less accurate
than a band saw, but it can do most of the same work
and more. A good 1⁄4" or 3⁄8" electric drill with bits and
accessories is useful for many jobs. If you plan to scarf
a great deal of plywood, 1⁄2" (12mm) thick or less, a 71⁄4"
electric circular saw with a Scarffer™ attachment will
ease your task considerably. A circular saw can also be
set up with guides and used as a table saw. An orbital
polisher with a selection of foam pads will speed up
finishing. If you buy these tools for a project and later
find that your interest in woodworking has vanished, you
can usually sell them to regain a portion of their price.
The first major piece of equipment to think about
buying is a table saw. This versatile tool is used prima-
rily to saw lumber to exact specifications, but it’s also
handy for beveling and tapering. A good table saw can
masquerade as a jointer and put a straight edge on a
warped board, and, with the addition of a sliding miter
gauge, it can serve as a cut-off saw. With dado blades
and other heads, a table saw also can act as a shaper.
At some point, now or in the future, you may think
about purchasing other power tools. The following
inventory of our shop equipment may help you in
deciding whether or not to supplement your basic
inventory.
Gougeon Brothers Power Tool Inventory
In listing the equipment we use in our shop, we hope
to give you an idea of the possibilities available to the
(1985) boatbuilder. We are in no way suggesting that
amateur builders should try to duplicate this inventory.
Our list is arranged in categories according to use, so
tools do not appear in order of importance. Tool choice
is a personal matter: as we talked this list over, we
realized that we didn’t always agree about individual
items. Because they change so quickly, specific brands
and model numbers are not included.
These tools have served best in reducing labor in a
professional boatshop. Many of them are industrial
quality and therefore may require additional electrical
wiring for safe use. Some are air-powered and so
require an air compressor. Should you decide to buy
air-powered tools, ask for advice about their operation.
Almost all of these tools may be somewhat powerful
for a home shop, and all are expensive. Note that we
use a number of auto body shop tools.
Electric Saws
Saber saw—The saber saw is one of the essential
boatbuilding tools. Look for a model that features
adjustable orbital blade action and a variable and very
accurate speed control, which enable you to set it to
best cut a variety of materials. It has a cutting oil attach-
ment for use with stainless steel and other hard-to-cut
metals, and it is extremely accurate in cutting wood.
71⁄4" circular saws—Use a circular saw to cut lumber
or plywood that is too unwieldy or too large to handle
on a table or radial arm saw and to notch frames and
beams. We have several and keep one permanently set
up with the Scarffer attachment to cut 8-to-1 scarfs on
plywood up to 3⁄8" (9mm) thick.
41⁄2" circular electric panel saw—This tool is
wonderful for cutting thin plywood and veneer,
but it’s not a necessity.
10" tilting arbor table saw—Look for a solidly-
constructed unit that has a well-positioned arbor
with good bearings. An easily adjusted rip fence is a
Chapter 8 – Tools and the Boatshop
61
Figure 8-3 Clamps: (1) sliding bar clamp; (2) heavy-duty,
large pad clamp; (3) quick action clamp; (4) C-clamps; (5)
spring clamps.

--- PAGE 76 ---
necessity. We also have a 14" table saw which can
handle very large stock, but it is not needed very
often.
14" wood cutting band saw—After the table saw, the
band saw is the most important stationary power tool
in any boatshop. It is the most accurate saw for cutting
curves and bevels. We often use an older Crescent 36"
band saw and a 14" metal cutting band saw.
14" radial arm cut-off saw—This is not a particularly
important tool in our shop, but we use it with a special
jig to cut perfect splices on stringers. It produces very
good miter cuts.
Planes, Polishers, and Sanders
7" electric orbital polisher—We use a polisher with
high-density foam disc pads to work on large areas
such as hulls and decks, and with two kinds of low-
density pads on interiors and strip construction. Stick
with a 2,000 rpm polisher because faster models will
scorch finished epoxy. We think this tool is an impor-
tant labor saver. 
Air-powered file sander or body file—This tool, more
commonly found in body shops, is used for fairing. 
We have modified it by replacing the standard 14"  2"
pad with a 22"  41⁄2" wood pad, which is perfect for 
9"  11" sheets of sandpaper split in half lengthwise
and held in place with feathering disc adhesive. With 
the long pad, the file sander does a good job of rough
fairing hulls and decks. Final fairing is still done by
hand.
Air-powered random orbital sander—Another auto
shop tool, this sander is lightweight, which makes it
very handy on irregular surfaces and in tight areas
such as the interiors of hulls. We use it mainly as a
finish sander with 180-grit and finer sandpaper,
although it does a good job of rough sanding with
coarse grit paper.
62
Getting Started
Figure 8-4  Using a 7" electric orbital polisher with a foam
disc sanding pad.
Figure 8-5 Using an air-powered file with the standard 
2"  14" pad.
Figure 8-6  A foam disc pad used with the 7" electric orbital
polisher. We bond a piece of 1⁄16" birch plywood (or plastic
laminate) onto the face of the disc. The plywood is flexible
enough to follow major contours, yet is effective for sanding
and fairing uneven surfaces with varying densities, such as
cured epoxy with various fillers.

--- PAGE 77 ---
Electric plane—This tool is excellent for planing large
surface areas, such as keels and sheer clamps, where 
a lot of stock is to be removed. A long 18" bed provides
excellent fairing ability and saves labor. It is very good
for removal of stock on curved surfaces and for changing
the bevels on frames, bulkheads, and deck beams.
Heavy-duty electric random orbital sander—We use
it with 80-grit and finer sandpapers on wood and well-
cured epoxy.
48" belt and 12" disc sander/finisher—We use this
stationary tool constantly to mill wood and metal to
close tolerances.
Electric finishing sander—Small and lightweight, this
sander is wonderful for getting into corners. You can
easily hold it with one hand. Its pad is approximately 
4"  4".
4" electric belt sander—This sander spends most of its
time on the shelf in our shop, but comes in handy for
sanding scarfs and other surfaces which must be flat. To
use this properly, you must have a great deal of skill.
Abrasives
The following types of sandpaper are most often used
for fairing and finishing:
Zirconia Alumina—Fairly aggressive cutting action,
very long wearing (toughest), useful for rough fairing.
Aluminum Oxide—Aggressive cutting action, long
wearing, good all around paper for rough and finish
sanding.
Silicon Carbide—Very aggressive cutting action
(hardest), moderately long wearing, useful for finishing
and wet-sanding (with waterproof paper).
Chapter 8 – Tools and the Boatshop
63
Figure 8-9 A selection of electric sanders: 4" finishing
sander, random orbital sander, and detail sander.
Figure 8-7 An electric plane used here to trim a wing mast
during construction.
Figure 8-8  A 7" electric orbital polisher is used with a foam
disc pad for sanding.

--- PAGE 78 ---
Grit refers to the mineral particle size and generally
determines the amount of material a paper will remove
and how smooth it will leave the surface. The following
grits are useful for fairing and finishing— 
36 to 50-grit—Rough fairing depending on the type
and amount of material.
50 to 80-grit—Local fairing and preparation for the
epoxy barrier coat.
80 to 100-grit—Preparing the epoxy barrier coat if a
high-build or filling primer is to be applied.
120 to 180-grit—Preparing the epoxy barrier coat for
primers and high-solids coatings.
220 to 400-grit—Preparing the epoxy barrier coat for
most paints or varnishes and sanding between coats of
paint or varnish. The thinner the coating film thickness,
the finer the grit. Follow paint manufacturers’ recom-
mendations.
Staplers, Tackers, and Nailers
Staples are cheaper than other fasteners, and they
require less labor. There are many large companies in
the stapling equipment field, and all make excellent
products. The major consideration in choosing one
over another is the availability of non-rusting alloy
staples in the size you need. Some manufacturers
provide alloy staples for some staple gun sizes, but
not for others. This is something to think about
before making a purchase.
Air-powered staple gun—This staple gun shoots
broad back wire staples from 1⁄4" to 9⁄16" long. We use it
mainly for clamping pressure when laminating veneers
and plywood up to 1⁄4" (6mm) thick.
Air-powered nailer—This nailer countersinks strong
wire nails up to 2" long. We use it primarily in assem-
bling jigs and fixtures. 
Air-powered tacker—This tacker shoots narrow-back,
fine wire staples up to 5⁄8" long. It leaves very small holes
to be plugged or filled and is often used for assem-
bling in fine cabinet work.
Electric tacker— Electric version of air-powered
staple gun.
Heavy-duty tacker—This tacker shoots narrow crown
19 gauge staples up to 1" long. Consider using it with
64
Getting Started
Figure 8-10 Staplers and tackers. Clockwise from upper left:
air-powered staple gun; heavy-duty tacker; hand-powered
stapler; light-duty tacker.
Figure 8-11 Fasteners. Top row: wire nails. Middle row:
narrow crown staples. Bottom row: wide crown staples.

--- PAGE 79 ---
bronze or Monel™ staples for installing stringers and
for assembling centerboard cases and other larger struc-
tural elements.
Routers
11⁄2-horsepower router—Because it is well powered, this
router is good for heavy jobs where a lot of material
must be removed. We regularly use it for notching and
shaping, too.
7⁄8-horsepower router—This is best for light shaping.
Plywood and veneer edge trimming is easy if you use
its fly-cutting knives with ball bearing guide.
Miscellaneous tools 
Heat guns—We have a number of heat guns and use
them to speed up epoxy cures, especially in cold
weather. We recommend the 750°F (399°C) models.
Heat guns can cause fires, so be careful with them.
Drill press—We use ours often for accurate drilling
of both wood and metal.
Light-duty wood shaper—This is for large shaping
jobs, such as rounding edges on stringers.
13" thickness planer—A planer is a necessity if you buy
rough lumber which must be surfaced. The alternative
is to have millwork done by a local cabinet shop or
lumberyard. Our planer is also used to smooth up rough
saw cuts as it is quicker than sanding. 
Tool grinder—Sharp tools are essential to efficient
production, so a well-balanced grinder with good
stones is essential to any shop. Dull tools are no fun.
6" jointer—This does a good job of smoothing saw
marks on planks.
WEST SYSTEM epoxy metering dispensers— A
metered dispensing system is a big help on any sizable
project. Our dispensers mix precise ratios, save time,
and reduce waste.
The Boatshop
Boatbuilders have demonstrated great resourcefulness
and ingenuity in the selection of appropriate shelter for
their activities. We have seen barns and living rooms
converted, with varying degrees of success, into perma-
nent and temporary shops. Your working space will be
determined by how much you can afford to spend, by
the size of your project, and by whether your shop will
be permanent or temporary.
Don’t try to build a boat without a shelter. Wooden
hulls and components suffer when exposed to rain,
snow, and sunlight. Tools left out in the open may rust
or disappear, and the alternative, hauling them in and
out, is time-consuming. Your boatbuilding time will be
restricted by the weather if you work outside, and you
will be forced to quit at nightfall, even if it’s only 6:00
P.M. While WEST SYSTEM epoxy products can withstand
most weather conditions, their efficacy will be reduced
by improper storage and by use in very cold conditions
or on wet wood.
Plan your boatshop carefully. It should provide you,
your hull, and your tools with adequate protection from
the elements. Your shop should have room enough for
your boat, tools, and lumber, and some extra space for
working and maneuvering. It must be warm and well
lighted if you are to do your best work, and it must be
safe. Your shop must be operated within the boundaries
of acceptable behavior as established by your neighbor-
hood. As you plan it, think about ways to expand your
workspace should you ever decide to build a larger
vessel.
Whether you buy, rent, or build your shop, make sure
that you will have enough floor space. In order to work
comfortably, you will need an area that is at least twice
as large as your hull. Multihull builders, who usually
construct hulls one at a time, will require twice the area
of their largest hulls. This general rule will allow
minimal room for tools, workbench, layout, small parts
manufacture, and lumber storage. If you have a large
collection of power tools, your needs may be a little
different.
In some cases, it is convenient to split total work area
into different buildings. In colder climates, a good
arrangement might be to use a large shed for actual hull
construction and a smaller shop—basement, utility room
or garage—for other functions. With some planning,
little jobs can be reserved for months when the larger
shop is difficult to heat. Because they would otherwise
require extraordinarily large workshops, multihulls are
built hull by hull indoors and assembled outside.
Chapter 8 – Tools and the Boatshop
65

--- PAGE 80 ---
An efficient floor plan will pay dividends in productivity.
Allow plenty of room around each power tool. You
will need from 15' to 20' (4.5m to 6m) of clear area
on each end and 5' (1.5m) on each side of a table saw
or planer in order to run stock through it. Portions of
this space may be shared with a band saw, since it’s
unlikely that you’ll operate these machines simultane-
ously. Figure 8-12 illustrates a typical and effective
shop layout. Don’t forget to plan for walking room at
either end of your hull.
Because a poorly organized shop can be hazardous as
well as irritating, pay attention to safety factors as you
think over your building. Reduce potential fire hazards
by finding metal cabinets in which to store solvents and
paints. Make sure that no combustibles will be stored
near your heater. Incorporate good housekeeping
procedures and venting devices into your floor plan
to reduce dust and fume inhalation. If young children
may visit you as you work, double your precautions.
Buy a lock for your boatshop to prevent vandalism and
to keep curious visitors out of danger.
Shop electrical installations require special care. Plan on
a minimum of 30 amps of power—more if you have an
extensive lighting system. Use heavy-duty wiring and
extension cords. All of your tools, cords, and wiring
should be double-grounded, especially if you will be
working on a damp earth floor. If you will be using
power tools on a dock or near water, protect circuits
with ground fault interrupters.
Boatbuilders often wonder about the best way to heat
their shops and about the effects of cold on WEST
SYSTEM epoxy. Any type of fuel can be used as long as
it presents no fire hazard. It is important that your
heating system be well vented for your personal safety
and because carbon dioxide emissions, especially from
kerosene heaters, can adversely affect resin cures.
See Chapter 4 for further information if you will be
working with WEST SYSTEM materials in cold weather.
Before getting down to work on your boatshop, stop to
consider the people around you. At some point in your
project, you will undoubtedly want to work into the
night. Will the noise of your power tools disturb neigh-
bors? If you have decided on an addition to your
garage, will your neighbors approve? If you plan to
carry out portions of your project in your home, have
you figured out some way to control dust?
A Temporary Shelter—One Option
If you are unable to rent or buy a boatshop, or if you
cannot afford to build a permanent structure to accom-
modate your project, you may decide to build a
temporary shelter. This might be freestanding or it
might butt up against a pre-existing building. Garages
and sheds can be enlarged simply and quickly with
temporary extensions. Your choices will depend on the
land and buildings you have to work with and on the
size of your boat.
Many different techniques have been used to build
satisfactory temporary shelters, but one stands out.
We suggest that you consider using heavy standard or
reinforced polyethylene sheeting on wood frames. This
construction system requires limited quantities of labor
and materials and can be used in warm or cold regions.
Conventional buildings certainly offer better insulation
from the weather, but polyethylene shops are inexpen-
sive and adequate for boatbuilding purposes.
Before erecting a temporary shelter, talk with your
neighbors and check local zoning ordinances.
Polyethylene buildings and additions are not beautiful,
they will not enhance your neighborhood, and they can
lead to hard feelings. If you explain your project to the
people next door and ask their blessings before you
begin, they will probably be very understanding. Zoning
officials can offer less latitude. Some towns permit free-
66
Getting Started
Figure 8-12  Layout for a typical home shop for building a 
25' to 30' (7m-9m) boat.
Storage area for timber
with sawhorses and
some arrangement for
stacking lumber.
Tablesaw 
Space for a 4' x 8'
sheet of plywood with
storage for plywood.
Tool
crib
Bench with vise

--- PAGE 81 ---
standing temporary structures while others allow only
temporary additions to pre-existing buildings.
To determine your shelter’s minimum size, double the
area of your boat. A 30' boat, 10' wide, has a total area
of about 300 square feet and will require 600 square
feet of construction space. A 36'  17' shop, with a
total area of 612 square feet, would be adequate and
would permit 3 feet of workroom at each end of the
hull. Less area would be insufficient, while more
would make things go a bit easier. Weigh the conven-
ience of extra elbow room against the costs of building
and heating additional space.
When you know your ideal shop size, look around
to see if you can extend any outbuildings to suitable
dimensions. If you don’t mind evicting your car, it’s far
easier to enlarge a high-ceilinged garage than it is to
build an entirely new structure. If you are able to use
pre-existing rigid walls, you will save time and have a
stronger shelter. An extension to a heated structure will
pick up some radiant heat and can share an electrical
system. Figure 8-13 illustrates a single-car garage
enlarged successfully with polyethylene and wood to
build a 24' (7m) trimaran.
If you plan to construct an independent building or 
if your addition is so large as to require substantial
support, we recommend using arches to form a basic
structural skeleton. The ends of your building can butt
up against a house or garage or be covered with plastic
or plywood, but provisions should be made for opening
them in warm weather. Figures 8-14, 8-16, 8-17 and 
8-18 show an arched shelter in which a 37' (11m)
trimaran was built.
It is not possible for us to provide a detailed materials
list for polyethylene shops because each is different.
Most will require arches every 4' along their lengths,
but this may vary. The basic instructions, which follow,
provide an outline for building. The dimensions and
quantities of lumber you will need depend on the size
of your structure and on the degree of curvature you
choose to build into its roofline.
Begin by building arches, half-section by half-section.
Each of these pieces consists of two boards separated by
regularly-spaced 2" blocks. Construct half-sections by
bending one board around a simple form. Use WEST
SYSTEM epoxy and nails to attach blocks at 18" intervals
and then form a sandwich by bonding the second 
board to your assembly. Remove this from the form when
the adhesive has cured and continue until you have
made as many half-arches as your shop will need.
When you have completed the half-sections of the
arches, join them at the roof peak with plywood
gussets. Use two gussets per arch, one on either side
of the joint, and bond with WEST SYSTEM epoxy and
nails or staples. Notch the gussets to receive a ridge-
pole. Sand outside surfaces smooth so that poly-
ethylene will not snag when it is installed.
Chapter 8 – Tools and the Boatshop
67
Figure 8-14 Assembling arches for a temporary shelter.
Figure 8-13 An example of a garage extension. 
( Photo by Art Briggs)

--- PAGE 82 ---
To erect your frame, drive heavy stakes—4' or 5' long 2
 4’s work well—every 4' along the sides of the area to
be enclosed. Make sure that the angle of your stakes
matches the angle of your arches. Then raise the arches
and clamp them to the stakes.
Fair up your roofline, adjusting arches where necessary.
Drill and bolt through two points on each joint/arch
overlap so that the stake becomes a rigid extension of
the arch. The arches will be freestanding and will not
require temporary bracing.
Ridgepoles are easy to install if you put them up in 4'
sections corresponding to stake and arch spacing. Make
these segments out of 3⁄4" stock and notch them to lock
into the gussets as shown in Figure 8-15. As you align
each arch, drop the next ridgepole section into its
notched position to maintain a straight roofline.
When the skeleton is erect, set up diagonal bracing for
longitudinal support. One way to do this is to build the
framework for end walls at a sloping angle, as in
Figure 8-17. You may need additional interior bracing
or stringers.
Polyethylene sheeting can be purchased at hardware
and building supply stores. Both black and translucent
sheets are usually available in 6 mil thicknesses.
Black polyethylene will absorb heat from the sun, so if
you have a choice and live in a cold climate, you may
prefer it. While its color does tend to retard the damage
caused by ultraviolet light, black plastic will not last
significantly longer than clear polyethylene. You can
repair rips and tears in your sheathing with duct tape,
but you should plan on replacing it every year.
If your shelter will be subjected to strong winds or if
you are willing to spend more to avoid annual re-
sheathing, consider using reinforced rather than
standard polyethylene. This material is three-layered,
with nylon webbing sandwiched between two layers of
plastic, and therefore costs more and lasts longer.
Whichever type of sheeting you use, apply the entire
arched roof covering in one piece. If you cannot buy a
single sheet large enough for your shop, use duct tape
to put one together. Spread smaller pieces out on a flat
surface, allowing about a foot of overlap at each joint.
68
Getting Started
Figure 8-16 Framework for shelter completed. Diagonal
bracing and stringers in place.
Figure 8-17 Plastic covering stretched over framework.
Figure 8-15 Detail of ridge pole arrangement for temporary
shelter.
Ridge Pole notched
for gusset.
Ridge Pole
Plywood gusset notched
for ridge pole. Notches
should be offset to allow
ridge poles to overlap.
Frame
Block
Frame

--- PAGE 83 ---
Apply equal tension to the sheets as you tape them
together and put on the tape itself with the greatest
possible pressure. Remember to turn your plastic over
to tape both sides.
If you are particularly concerned about conserving
heat, consider covering your framework with the
heavy cardboard used for appliance shipping crates
before you apply plastic sheeting. When you work on
the interior of your shop, you can fill in your “walls”
with fire-resistant insulating material before sheathing
them with additional cardboard.
After you have pulled the plastic over your framework,
fasten it along the end arches, nailing through a thin
batten to distribute the load evenly. To fasten it at
ground level, place a board over the polyethylene and
drive nails through to the arches. Move inside your
shelter, place more battens over your sheeting and nail
through them to the board.
Floors for polyethylene sheds are expensive and time-
consuming to make. You can probably make do with a
plastic-covered dirt floor if you plan drainage carefully.
Dig a trench around the perimeter of your structure and
lay polyethylene sheeting over the entire floor area out
into the trench. For a more solid floor surface, cover the
plastic with fiberboard.
If you intend to heat your workshop, we suggest that
you install inside walls to form dead air spaces. You can
do this with an inner polyethylene liner, but heavy
cardboard is a better insulating material and can add
some rigidity to your structure. If you staple and tape
cardboard neatly in place, your shop may begin to look,
at least on the inside, like a real building.
Further heat savings are possible if your building is tall
enough to allow you to nail joists across your arches for
a dropped ceiling. You will find that heated air rises to
the ceiling and investment in a fan will help push it back
down.
Install your heating and electrical systems and your
temporary shelter is ready for a boat. Vent your heater
in an approved manner, using a large flashing if you
must run a stovepipe through an end wall. Avoid coal
and wood stoves because their sparks may damage your
plastic sheathing, and remember that open flames can
ignite some solvents and all woods.
Chapter 8 – Tools and the Boatshop
69
Figure 8-18 Shelter completed. Plywood walls were used at
both ends to give the structure extra rigidity.

--- PAGE 84 ---
70
Getting Started

--- PAGE 85 ---
Wood species availability, quality, and cost vary widely. As mentioned in the preface to Chapter 3, several
factors (increased population, shifting use patterns, global markups) have influenced change in the wood
supply chain since this book was first published.
Species considered traditional boatbuilding woods (mahogany, teak, Sitka spruce, Douglas fir, etc.) have
become more expensive as supplies have dwindled or suppliers have reconsidered the value of their local
resource. Many countries actively support value-added production rather than exporting wood as a raw
material to foreign markets. Companies marketing to boatbuilders and other high-end wood product
consumers engage in a variety of strategies to meet the need, including wood salvage, recycling, and
sustainable forestry practices both in natural forests and on plantations.
Some wooden boatbuilders have become more adventuresome, considering alternative non-traditional
wood species to use in projects. At one time, all boatbuilding was done with local species. Wood/epoxy
construction allows one to reconsider local species that may have fallen out of favor during the heyday 
of traditional boatbuilding.
The Internet has made it easier to shop for wood and is always a good place to start. On the other hand,
you may be surprised by what your local lumber merchant carries or can get. Make sure you check all
sources.
The general information presented here is useful whether you plan to build a traditionally planked boat, a
laminated hull, a strip composite canoe, or a hard chine or compounded plywood vessel. The section on
Choosing Wood for Laminating a Hull reviews general considerations in selecting veneer or plywood where
compounding is an issue. In later chapters, we discuss more specifics of the wood needed for various
methods of hull and interior construction.
Boatbuilders use a very small percentage of the lumber
sold in the United States, so few local dealers sell very
much of the quality and type needed for boat construc-
tion. It may be difficult to find materials for your
project, but keep a few things in mind as you shop.
Lumber, plywood, and veneer are by far the cheapest
materials in a boat. Buy the highest quality wood avail-
able. When the waste that results from knots and grain
run out in lower quality boards is factored in, the best
becomes a bargain. You will put an enormous amount
of time into a boat, and it makes sense to guarantee 
the longevity of your investment by using top grade
materials.
Also remember that the moisture content of the wood
at the time you use it may determine the success or
failure of a project. As we noted in Chapter 3, wood is
strong, stiff, and dimensionally stable when its moisture
levels are relatively low. Careful selection and storage,
with a keen eye to maintaining moisture level equilib-
rium in the range between 8% and 12%, will minimize
the chances of moisture-related problems and maximize
the effectiveness of WEST SYSTEM® Brand epoxy.
Ordering Lumber
Be prepared for some difficulty in buying boat lumber.
Your local dealer may sell clear Douglas fir, Honduras
mahogany, and cedar, but his doing so reflects
commercial demand in other fields—the construction,
pattern making, and mill work industries respectively—
rather than an attempt to meet a demand for boat
construction materials. The rare dealer will stock Sitka
spruce and cedar. We always hope that the resurgence
of wooden boatbuilding will increase availability and
permit better distribution of quality boat lumber.
If you can’t find wood locally, you may have to order
it from a mail order specialty house. Freight rates on
Buying Wood
C H A P T E R
9

--- PAGE 86 ---
unimproved lumber are quite low, so shipping costs
over long distances are fairly reasonable. Since they
serve large markets and specialize in specific types and
qualities of wood, the mail order houses are able to
offer quality materials at moderate prices. There are,
however, problems with ordering by mail: you must
often buy wood sight unseen, with the reputation of
the company as your only assurance of quality, and
you may have to schedule around the lag time between
ordering and receiving your lumber.
It’s sometimes possible to acquire wood in other ways.
If you live where timber is harvested, you may be able
to purchase top quality boards directly from a small
sawmill. This lumber is usually green and rough sawn,
but its price is accordingly low. Other potential sources
are wholesale houses, which provide special woods to a
regional industrial market. These firms like to deal with
large volume trade, but they often accept smaller orders
at a slight premium.
Choose the kind of wood you will use in your boat
before you order. You may need more than one species.
Check plans for specifications or select particular woods
for their physical properties. You will probably discover
that relatively few of the better boatbuilding varieties
are available at one time, and if you can’t find what you
want, you may be forced to make substitutions. In most
applications, several different species will work equally
well, so if you can’t find your first choice, another with
similar physical properties and density might stand in
its place. See Appendix B for the mechanical proper-
ties of selected boatbuilding woods. Price may also be
a factor in your selection.
If at all possible, buy lumber that has been dried to
approximately 12% moisture content. Green wood is
heavier than dry wood and therefore costs more to ship.
If your lumber has not been seasoned, give it time to
reach equilibrium or dry it in a kiln. Although wood
may be damaged by very high temperatures, we’ve never
had any problems with the kiln-dried lumber we’ve
received. Before using any wood, follow the procedure
described in Chapter 3 to check its moisture level.
The amount of time it takes to air dry wood depends on
the moisture content of the wood, its ratio of exposed
surface area to volume, its density (softwoods tend to
dry more quickly than hardwoods), and the temperature
and humidity of the atmosphere in which it is seasoned.
There is no magic formula for predicting how long you
will have to wait before you can use a board. Green
1⁄8" (3mm) cedar veneer might reach 8% to 12%
moisture content in weeks, while 2" (50mm) hardwood
will take much longer to dry.
When ordering lumber, specify dimensions in thickness,
width, and length. In the United States, thickness, the
most important of these measurements, is often given
in quarter inch fractions, although it is also sometimes
listed in inches. In the quarter system, 1" thick stock
may, for example, be referred to as 4⁄4, 11⁄2" as 6⁄4, 2"
stock as 8⁄4, and so on. Width is always measured
in inches and length in feet. A board foot of lumber
measures 12"  12"  1".
We prefer to buy thinner, rather than thicker, stock
because it dries faster and can be used sooner. We
do purchase thick lumber, however, when there is a
price advantage or when it is the least wasteful way
to develop the size we need. To expedite drying and
reduce stressing, we usually re-saw lumber that is
more than 1" (25mm) thick.
As you work out a lumber list, calculate the board sizes
that will result in the least waste. Unless we are buying
boards in specific sizes, we try to get the widest and
longest stock we can without paying a premium. As a
rule, lumber over 20' (6mm) long or over 8 or 10"
(200 or 250mm) wide is more expensive, and prices
are usually high enough to warrant scarfing shorter
pieces for length and laminating thinner pieces for
width.
Thickness and width dimensions stated in inches
measure the stock before surfacing or finishing: a
1" (25mm) board is 1" thick rough and 3⁄4" (18mm)
thick finished. Wood measured by the quarter, on the
other hand, is identified by its finished measurement. A
4⁄4 board was 5⁄4, or 11⁄4", thick before planing and is 1"
thick at the time of sale.
Boat lumber is usually available either rough sawn
or finished. Rough sawn boards are generally simply
called rough. If a board is marked S2S, two of its major
surfaces have been planed. The marking S4S means
that all four sides of a plank have been put through
a planer. We often purchase rough lumber because
with careful surfacing we can use more wood from the
72
Getting Started

--- PAGE 87 ---
board than typically survives commercial planing. Boat
lumber prices are often quoted for rough sawn, with an
extra charge for surfacing.
Quality—What To Look For
There is no formal grading system for boat lumber.
Standard markings and descriptions refer to surface,
dimensions, and sawing techniques, but not to quality.
While it is assumed that only clear, properly sawn
lumber is acceptable for boatbuilding, high-quality
wood commands high prices, creating some incentive
for unscrupulous dealers to substitute lower grades.
The best defense against this is to inspect wood piece-
by-piece before buying it and to accept only high-
quality lumber. If you order by mail, be sure to deal
with a company that has a reputation for honest
business practices. We have ordered from many firms
and have rarely found wood quality misrepresented.
Some top quality wood is quarter sawn and sold as
vertical grain lumber, labeled VG. Quarter sawn wood
is far superior to slab sawn wood because it has greater
dimensional stability, it is less liable to internal stressing,
and it is easier to machine. Vertical grain stock is easy
to inspect: the end grain can be “read” to determine
overall quality. In a true vertical grain board, growth
rings run perpendicular to the flat surfaces. Lower
quality quarter sawn planks may have rings that run
as much as 45° off the vertical.
You can saw your own vertical grain planks from thicker
stock. See Figure 9-1. Use a table saw to cut 2" or 3"
(50mm or 75mm) stock down to 2"  2" (50mm 
50mm) boards. Turn the squared planks and saw the
faces that show the most consistent vertical grain in the
dimensions you need. Stringers and other boat parts
that are less than 2" thick can often be cut from 2" slab
sawn stock, so they will have vertical grain. For more
information on preparing planking for stripper canoes,
see Chapter 23.
In many boards, general grain direction is not exactly
parallel to board surfaces. With grain run-out, grain
may typically run more or less parallel to the board
and then, marking the spot of a branch in the standing
tree, curve radically toward one end. Grain run-out
is not a serious problem until the angle of difference
between the board and its grain exceeds 4°. Boards with
severe grain run-out should be used for less structurally
demanding parts.
Knots are obvious major flaws. More difficult to deal
with, however, are the radical grain changes within a
board caused by the proximity of a knot in the tree.
Grain that grew within 2" of a knot can vary 20° to
30° from the general run of the grain, and this can lead
to extreme weakening. Look at all four sides to be sure
that you have not missed other grain distortions.
Avoid planks that have combinations of heartwood and
sapwood. These two types of wood dry at different rates
and can set up internal stresses in a board. You can
usually see this situation in distinct color changes, since
heartwood is generally slightly darker than sapwood.
Pith, the wood from the very center of the tree, tends
to have burled grain, which is difficult to work, so avoid
it as well. Some species, such as Douglas fir, are more
likely than others to develop pitch pockets. Pockets that
are large enough to cause significant weakening are
usually plainly visible.
Even with careful selection, some of the planks you buy
will be better than others. When the wood is delivered,
inspect it again and separate it into two or three groups
by quality. We usually identify deck and hull stringers
and other components with high structural requirements
and save the best stock for them. Use lower quality
lumber for items like joining cleats, where grain is not
particularly important. Every boat has many areas that
require short pieces, so saw around flaws and use the
cut-up lumber for them. Careful planning and efficient
use of available lumber are necessary, but it’s possible
to safely use lesser quality wood without making struc-
tural compromises.
Chapter 9 – Buying Wood
73
Figure 9-1  Alternate methods for cutting your own vertical
grain planks.
From flat-sawn stock
From vertical-sawn stock
Edge grained strips

--- PAGE 88 ---
If it is not yet perfectly dry, stack the wood in a dry
place after sorting it. Place thin sticks between each
layer of boards so they will dry without sagging and
to permit good air circulation around each piece.
Pressure-Treated Materials
As a general rule, we do not recommend using
pressure-treated materials for wood/epoxy composite
applications. We have tested pressure-treated lumber
and plywood and have found enough variation in
structural quality, moisture content, and adhesion
performance to make us leery. The key consideration
for us is the variability in the adhesive bond between
epoxy and the pressure-treated surface. Some of
these treatments include products containing paraffin
as a “waterproofing,” and paraffin is a release agent.
Additional considerations are the reformulation or
withdrawal of a number of products and treatments
due to environmental and health concerns.
Properly done, wood/epoxy composite construction
reduces the potential for rot to a bare minimum.
We believe that one should pursue better building
techniques to prevent rot conditions rather than
employ pressure-treated materials and risk structural
failures due to poor adhesion.
Having said all this, we know that builders will
continue to experiment with pressure-treated materials.
As new treatments come into the market, they should
be tested on a product-by-product basis, making sure
that the wood meets all the other criteria for quality
construction, i.e. structural soundness, low moisture
content, proper surface quality, and, most important,
glueability.
Choosing Wood for Laminating a Hull
The exact sizes and combinations of lumber, veneer,
and plywood you will use for laminating a hull depend
on the method of hull construction you choose. In
Chapter 5, we provided an overview of hull construc-
tion methods; Chapters 20-25 will discuss more specific
material requirements for each method. The general
discussion here pertains to the veneer or plywood used
in three key laminating techniques (mold, strip veneer,
or stringer-frame) where compounding becomes an
issue both in buying the wood and building the boat.
All wood used in laminating must bend easily over a
hull’s severest curves. You may be able to use stock up
to 5⁄8" (15mm) thick on very large boats, but on smaller
projects you may find that only 1⁄16" (1.5mm) veneer can
negotiate a tight radius. If you rely exclusively on
staples for pressure, 1⁄8" (3mm) is usually the practical
minimum laminate thickness. One-sixteenth-inch
veneers require more staples for equal pressure over a
given surface and therefore require extra labor for
stapling and staple removal. This is an instance where
plastic staples are useful because they do not need to
be removed. Very thin veneers may also occasionally be
pulverized by staples.
The amount of compound curvature in a boat hull
determines the width of stock you can use in the
laminating process. A short, fat boat requires narrower
pieces, while a long, skinny boat can use very wide
ones if they are available. The narrowest stock we’ve
used was 4" (100mm) wide. It’s unusual to have to use
a width less than 6" (150mm). Most common in
boatbuilding are 8" (200mm) veneers.
Length of stock is not critical, but you can save time
if your wood is long enough to reach around one half
of the hull at a diagonal angle. Scarfing shorter pieces
together reduces waste and provides the right lengths,
but at a cost of time. You can also, in certain situations,
butt veneers during molding, a technique that is
discussed in a later chapter.
You can cut laminating stock yourself, but you may run
into problems. It’s difficult, even with a large table saw,
to resaw stock that is more than 4" thick and, as will
be explained, it takes a lot more time to fit two 4" wide
pieces than it does one 8" piece. Another problem is
waste: if you are making 1⁄8" veneers, you will lose at
least 50% and perhaps as much as 70% of your stock
to sawdust. If you can use thicker planking, 1⁄4" or more,
your lumber yard may be able to cut wide pieces on
a resaw machine. This relatively efficient equipment
wastes only 30% to 40% of the wood.
We usually buy sliced veneers and have found that they
are cheaper than those we saw ourselves. Slicing produc-
tion methods result in almost no waste and are very
fast and efficient. Commercially sliced veneers are avail-
able up to 18" wide and 17' long, although a more
common size is 8" to 10" wide and 12" long. It’s difficult
74
Getting Started

--- PAGE 89 ---
to slice wood thicker than 1⁄8" without checking and
shattering, but an 1⁄8" veneer limit doesn’t seem to be a
real disadvantage with smaller boats. Longer hulls of
50' or more can use thicker stock if it is available. In
these cases, the use of thin veneer involves increased
labor for extra laminations, and this may be a major
concern.
Commercial plywood is often used in laminating. There
are many areas, as will be described in later chapters,
where it is a good, practical choice. Plywood has already
been laminated, so its dimensions are stable. It is readily
available. Thin plywood will not split as readily as
veneer when it is bent over tight curves, and it is easy
to prefinish, especially for interiors on stringer-frame
hulls. Plywood does, however, have some disadvan-
tages. It is expensive and does not have the potential
strength of veneer. At least one third of its grain runs at
right angles to the remainder of it, so some compro-
mises may be necessary when you arrange it on a hull.
Veneer and Plywood
Sophisticated manufacturing techniques are used to
make both veneer and plywood. It’s helpful to know
a little about these processes before buying either
material.
Veneers are thin sheets of wood, which can be of
various species and in a range of thicknesses. They
are cut from logs in two different ways: by slicing
and, more frequently, by rotary cutting or peeling.
With the latter technique, the log is held on lathe-like
spindles and rotated while a knife peels off a contin-
uous ribbon of wood. Slice-cut veneers are made by
quartering a log and then slicing it repeatedly with a
straight knife as shown in Figure 9-2. In both processes,
the log is thoroughly soaked before cutting. Plywood is
made of dried veneers, bonded in plies or layers with
the grain of each layer at right angles to the grain of
the layers on either side of it. At least three plies of
veneer are used in a sheet of plywood.
Buying Veneer
Slice-cut veneers are preferable to rotary-cut veneers
for several reasons. Peeled veneers are very unstable:
their tangential cut results in maximum expansion and
contraction. Sliced veneers are more expensive, but they
are more like vertical grain, quarter sawn lumber and
are very stable and unlikely to warp. They have an
additional advantage in that they are available in longer
pieces. In general laminating, where limited clamping
pressure is used, sliced veneers are easier to hold in
place and require fewer staples.
Few lumberyards sell sliced veneers. In fact, so far
as we know, you will have to order veneers from the
companies that cut them. This sole source situation
works well for those who can use fairly large quantities
of veneer because manufacturers’ prices are usually low.
Sliced veneers are commonly sold by the square foot 
(in 1985, 1,000 square feet of 1⁄8" cedar veneer cost $450)
and are shipped in flitches—bundles 1' to 18" wide.
Each flitch contains from 500 to 1,000 square feet of
veneer. Smaller quantities, as might be needed for a
dinghy, can be more expensive to buy and ship.
Sliced veneers up to 17' long are usually available, but
12' pieces are adequate for most laminating. Pieces less
than 12' long can be used less wastefully in smaller
boats. Widths are random in all lengths, but generally
range between 6" and 12". As we explain in later
Chapter 9 – Buying Wood
75
Figure 9-2 Manufacturing sequence in veneer slicing.
Quarter log
milled to eighth
log then sent
to vats for
soaking.
Eighth log
moved down
onto the pre-heated
knife in veneer slicer.
Courtesy of J.M. Vaughn
Olympic Mfg. Co.

--- PAGE 90 ---
chapters, we advise against cutting veneers to standard
widths until after you have experimented with bending
them around a hull’s most severe curves.
The thickness of sliced veneers is limited by the
technology used to produce them. The maximum
thickness that can be cut without damage to the wood
is 1⁄8" (3mm). Thinner veneers are rarely needed, since
1⁄8" pieces bend easily over most curves.
If you want to, you can buy veneers and laminate
plywood yourself. This takes extra time, but it guarantees
absolute control over both the wood and the adhesive
in the laminate. In homemade plywood, veneers may
be oriented in the best directions for specific applica-
tions, and sheets can be made to exact length and
thickness desired. If you have cheap veneer and labor
and an organized approach, it may be less expensive
to make panels than to buy them.
Buying Plywood
Plywood panels are easy to work with and their use
in boatbuilding is discussed throughout this book.
Plywood is an excellent material for manufacturing flat
boat components, and it can also be helpful for making
parts with limited curvature. Commercial plywood is
used for compounded and hard chine construction, as
well as in other applications. It does, however, have a
few disadvantages.
Both domestic and imported plywood panels are sold
in the United States. Imported plywood is more expen-
sive than the domestic variety, but we prefer it in many
situations. Most domestic plywood contains peeled
Douglas fir, inside if not on either or both surfaces.
While this wood can be strong and tough, the combi-
nation of early wood and late wood which results from
the peeling process makes it somewhat unstable.
Different expansion and contraction rates in interior
Douglas fir plies can set up stresses in an entire panel.
Peeled fir is also so hard to finish that the best approach
is often to sheathe it in fiberglass cloth. Fiberglassing
also eliminates another Douglas fir shortcoming, weather
checking.
Marine grade plywood imported from the Netherlands,
United Kingdom, West Germany, and Israel, in contrast,
is usually made of medium-density tropical woods.
Okoume (Gaboon), utile (sipo), Lauan (Philippine
mahogany), meranti, and mecore are generally more
desirable for boatbuilding than Douglas fir because
they do not have distinct growth rings and the
problems associated with them. All of these species
easily take natural finishes, and they all have low
expansion/contraction rates.
Plywood is almost always sold in 4'  8' (1200mm 
2400mm) sheets, in various thickness, and with different
numbers of plies. Larger sheets are available, but
usually at considerably higher prices. When we need big
plywood panels, we scarf regular sheets to size. For
instructions on scarfing plywood, see Chapter 12. One-
quarter-inch plywood may be constructed with three
plys of veneer or with five plies. The 5-ply is more
difficult to make and therefore more expensive, but it
is also more evenly balanced, with greater stiffness and
strength in both directions. The thickness of imported
marine plywood may be listed in millimeters. A 6 mm
panel is roughly equivalent to a 1⁄4" panel, while 9 mm
is slightly thinner than 3⁄8".
When you buy plywood, consider the quality and
species of internal veneers and the suitability of the
adhesive used in the laminate. Voids within the
plywood may cause failure, and the glues used in
marine applications must be waterproof. A strict
grading system, outlined in Figure 9-3, describes
the quality of surface veneers in domestic plywood,
but other markings are used to identify adhesives
and to grade interior plies.
A typical piece of domestic plywood suitable for use in
boats is stamped MARINE AA EXT. MARINE indicates
that interior veneers are of B quality or better. AA means
that both faces are grade A, just as NA would tell you
that one surface is suitable for natural finishing and the
other is of A quality. AC describes a panel with one A
quality face and one C quality face. The interior veneers
of panels that are not labeled MARINE may be better
than C quality, but there is no guarantee that they are.
EXT panels are made with waterproof adhesive as,
indeed, are most pieces of plywood manufactured
today. If you are uncertain about the glue used in a
laminate, domestic or imported, or if it is not marked,
boil a sample in water for 30 minutes, dry it in an oven
for an hour, and then repeat the process. If the piece
survives without delaminating, its adhesive is probably
good enough for marine construction.
76
Getting Started

--- PAGE 91 ---
Grading and marking systems differ from country to
country, so ask questions when you purchase imported
plywood. Most panels brought into the United States
fall into the American Plywood Association’s MARINE
grade, and some are of higher quality. Waterproof
adhesive is usually used in imported plywood, but 
you should boil a sample as described above if you
have any doubts.
We do not recommend oriented strand board (OSB) for
anything on or in a boat, but it may be your most cost-
effective choice for patterns, molds, and other tooling
applications. It will shrink and swell, so use it carefully.
Chapter 9 – Buying Wood
77
Figure 9-3 Veneer grades for plywood panels manufactured
in the United States.
Veneers are graded like lumber into various quality groupings
and the trade standards generally adhered to are those of the
American Plywood Association. There are six veneer grades.
Grade N—Smooth surface “natural finish” veneer; select, all
heartwood or all sapwood; free of open defects; not more
than six repairs (of wood only) per 4'  8' panel, made
parallel to grain and well matched for grain and color.
Grade A—Smooth, paintable; not more than 18 neatly-made
repairs of the boat, sled or router type, and parallel to grain;
may be used for natural finish in less demanding applications.
Grade B—Solid surface; shims, circular repair plugs and tight
knots to 1" across grain permitted; some minor splits
permitted.
Grade C—Tight knots to 11⁄2"; knot holes to 1" across
grain and some to 11⁄2" if total width of knots and knot
holes is within specified limits; both synthetic and wood
repairs permitted; discoloration and sanding defects not
affecting strength permitted; limited splits allowed.
Grade C Plugged—Improved C veneer with splits
limited to 1⁄8" in width, and knot holes and borer holes
limited to 1⁄4"  1⁄2"; some broken grain; synthetic repairs
permitted.
Grade D—Knots and knot holes to 21⁄2" width across grain and
up to 3" within specified limits; limited splits permitted.

--- PAGE 92 ---
78
Getting Started

--- PAGE 93 ---
Please read this chapter in its entirety. It has been updated from earlier editions to represent current (2005)
safety and environmental standards. Read and follow all WEST SYSTEM® product label directions and warnings.
Refer to the Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) for detailed product safety information.
Boatbuilding should not be hazardous to your health.
While we don’t feel that it’s necessary to discuss all
aspects of woodworking and power tool safety, we do
think it important to set guidelines for safe use of WEST
SYSTEM Brand products. This chapter covers the health
hazards of working with WEST SYSTEM epoxy and some
related shop hazards. More importantly, it offers
common sense safety practices that will help prevent
health problems and assure your long and productive
use of epoxy. As an epoxy user, you should be
concerned about health and safety and be well
informed of the materials and products you use.
Serious health problems associated with epoxy use
are uncommon; most problems are minor, but they
can cause discomfort and diminish the rewards of
boatbuilding. Fortunately, they are preventable.
Understanding Overexposure
When we select raw ingredients for WEST SYSTEM epoxy
products, we search for a balance between desired
physical properties and lowest human and environ-
mental health risks. Epoxy resins, hardeners, and fillers
are comprised of a number of chemical ingredients, of
varying proportion and toxicity. Fortunately, they contain
only a very small proportion of the more hazardous
ingredients.
There is a safe exposure level for most substances. The
more toxic the substance, the lower that level will be.
Overexposure occurs when the safe exposure level is
exceeded. When this happens, the substance can cause
health problems. Your immune system and overall health
can influence your tolerance of a substance.
Hazardous substances enter the body by skin absorp-
tion, inhalation, or ingestion. The route for a particular
substance depends on its physical characteristics and
how it is normally used.
Epoxy Resins and Hardeners
The risk of exposure to resin, hardener, and mixed
epoxy is greatest when they are liquid. As epoxy cures,
the chemical ingredients react to form a non-hazardous
solid. As it solidifies, epoxy and its components are less
likely to enter the body.
Skin contact is the most common means of exposure
to resins and hardeners. Even minor skin contact,
if repeated often enough, can cause chronic health
problems. In rare cases, with prolonged or repeated
contact, the skin can absorb harmful epoxy ingredients.
Exposure by inhaling vapors is unlikely because epoxy
products evaporate slowly. However, the risk increases
when ventilation is inadequate or when the products
are heated.
People rarely ingest epoxy, but it can happen when
resin, hardener, or mixed epoxy contaminate food,
beverages or eating surfaces. 
Partially Cured Epoxy Dust
Sanding partially cured epoxy produces airborne dust,
which increases your risk of exposure by skin contact,
inhaling, or ingesting. Although epoxy may cure firm
enough to sand within a day, it may not cure completely
for up to two weeks. Until then, the dust can contain
unreacted hazardous components. Do not overlook or
underestimate this hazard.
Health Effects from Overexposure to Epoxy
We have a long history of working with and around
epoxies daily. As builders and epoxy formulators, we’ve
had a much higher risk of exposure to epoxy than the
average builder or casual epoxy user. Through our own
experience and the experience of other builders, we
can estimate the likelihood of health problems from
handling WEST SYSTEM resins and hardeners.
Safety
C H A P T E R
10

--- PAGE 94 ---
The following are the most common health problems
stemming from epoxy use. Nearly all of us can prevent
these problems. The majority of those who do develop
a health problem can continue using epoxy with
adequate precautions.
Dermatitis
Fewer than 10% of epoxy users react when overex-
posed to epoxy resin or hardener. The most common
reaction is contact dermatitis, or skin inflammation.
Both epoxy resin and hardener can cause acute contact
dermatitis. Discomfort can be severe, but usually disap-
pears after stopping contact with the irritant. Repeated
skin contact with resins and hardeners may also cause
chronic contact dermatitis, which is usually milder but
longer lasting. If left untreated for long periods, it can
progress to eczema, a form of dermatitis that can
include swelling, blisters, and itching. Partially cured
epoxy sanding dust, if allowed to settle on the skin,
can also lead to contact dermatitis.
Allergic Dermatitis (Sensitization)
Allergic dermatitis is a more serious problem, but less
than 2% of epoxy users are likely to get it. Allergic
dermatitis is caused by the body hyperreacting to an
allergen. Sensitization is the condition of being allergic
to a substance. Your immune system and the degree and
frequency of exposure to epoxy affects your chance of
becoming sensitized. You are most susceptible if you have
been grossly overexposed to epoxy or if you are inher-
ently sensitized or allergic to a component of epoxy. You
are also more susceptible if you have fair skin, if you’ve
already been exposed to other sensitizing substances, or
if you have hay fever, other allergies, or are under stress.
You may become sensitized to epoxy after many
exposures or just one. It could take ten days of
exposure, a month, or even years. It is best to avoid
all exposure because you cannot know ahead of time
how much you can tolerate before you become allergic.
Allergic reactions to epoxy can result in irritated skin
or respiratory problems. Irritated skin is by far the more
common of the two. Usually, it appears much like a
reaction to poison ivy and may include swelling, itching,
and red eyes. Just as with poison ivy, the irritation can
be mild or severe, acute or chronic. 
Inhaling concentrated epoxy vapors, if done frequently
or for long periods, can irritate your respiratory tract.
Exposing sensitive skin areas, like the eyelids, to highly
concentrated epoxy vapors may cause itching and
swelling.
See a physician if irritation persists or worsens after
avoiding epoxy for several days. There is no specific
antidote for epoxy sensitization, but symptoms can
sometimes be treated with medicine.
Once sensitized, additional (and sometimes increasingly
severe) reactions become likely upon future exposures,
even to tiny amounts of epoxy. It is difficult, but not
impossible, to prevent recurrences. Resume epoxy
use only after symptoms disappear and strictly follow
the recommended handling procedures to prevent
exposure. Read the Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS)
so you can identify symptoms and employ preventive
and first aid measures.
Severe Irritation and Chemical Burns
Hardener burns are uncommon. Mixed epoxy is
unlikely to cause burns. By themselves, WEST SYSTEM
epoxy hardeners are moderately corrosive. If left in
contact with the skin, they can severely irritate it and
cause moderate chemical burns. Chemical burns
develop gradually and first cause irritation and slight
pain. The burn may discolor and slightly scar the skin.
The time it takes for a hardener to cause a chemical
burn depends on the area of contact and hardener
concentration. When resin and hardener are mixed,
the hardener is diluted and therefore less corrosive.
Although mixed epoxy is less corrosive, never leave it
on your skin. It cures rapidly and is difficult to remove.
Respiratory Irritation
Breathing highly concentrated epoxy vapor can irritate
the respiratory system and cause sensitization. At room
temperature, epoxy vapors are unlikely to be highly con-
centrated. However, if you are already sensitized to epoxy,
exposure to low concentrations of epoxy vapors can
trigger an allergic reaction. At warmer temperatures and
in unventilated spaces, the epoxy vapor levels increase.
Never breathe the sanding dust of partially cured epoxy.
Epoxy chemicals remain reactive until they have cured.
Serious health problems can result from sanding epoxy
before it is fully cured. When you inhale these dust
particles, they become trapped in the mucus lining of
your respiratory system. The reactive material can cause
severe respiratory irritation and/or respiratory allergies.
80
Getting Started

--- PAGE 95 ---
WEST SYSTEM fillers present few hazards by themselves.
However, breathing any nuisance dust will worsen
existing respiratory problems. Smokers and others
whose lungs are under strain are far more likely to
develop serious respiratory problems.
Preventing Overexposure to Epoxy
You can prevent health problems from the start by
limiting your exposure to hazardous materials. This
means more than using respirators, goggles, and protec-
tive clothing. 
General Guidelines
While the following guidelines are meant for an indus-
trial setting, they can be an important guide for casual
epoxy users. Consider the following steps to protect
yourself from epoxy or any hazardous product.
Step 1—Make informed decisions about the products
you use. Use the least hazardous product that will do
the job. Often you can find a product with minimal
health hazards that is adequate or even superior for
the job. This can reduce or eliminate the hazard source.
Step 2—Set up a safe shop. Install equipment or use
procedures that prevent or reduce exposure. This can
include ventilation or specialized storage for hazardous
materials. Effective ventilation can range from expen-
sive, high-tech air-filtration and exhaust systems to the
basic floor or window fans, and is useful for a wide
range of vapors and dusts. A dedicated cabinet or
isolated area for storing hazardous materials can help
reduce exposure.
Step 3—Wear protective equipment (goggles, safety
glasses, gloves, respirators, protective clothing, etc.)
appropriate for the job at hand. The recommended
minimum for most epoxy users is gloves, eye protec-
tion, and protective clothing. Protect yourself from
epoxy vapors by using a respirator with an organic
vapor cartridge. The approved respiratory protection
against epoxy dust, wood dust, and nuisance dusts is
a dust/mist mask or respirator.
Limiting Exposure to Epoxy Resins and Hardeners
The government has not established exposure limits for
WEST SYSTEM epoxy products. We recommend limiting
exposure to the levels approved for the raw materials
used in formulating the product, as shown in the
products’ MSDS. Practice the following procedures
for the safe use and handling of our epoxy products.
1. Avoid contact with resin, hardeners, mixed epoxy,
and sanding dust from partially cured epoxy. Wear
protective gloves and clothing whenever you handle
epoxies. Barrier skin creams provide added protec-
tion. If you do get resin, hardener, or mixed epoxy
on your skin, remove it as soon as possible. Resin
is not water soluble. Use a waterless skin cleanser
to remove resin or mixed epoxy from your skin.
Hardener is water soluble—wash with soap and
warm water to remove hardener or sanding dust
from your skin. Always wash thoroughly with soap
and warm water after using epoxy, removing amine
blush, or sanding epoxy. If you spill epoxy on your
clothes, change them immediately. Use skin cleanser
to remove any epoxy from you and your clothes. If
you cannot completely remove it from your clothes,
do not continue to wear them. If it is mixed epoxy,
you may wear the clothes again once the epoxy has
completely cured. Never use solvents to remove
epoxy from your skin. 
Stop using the product if you develop a reaction.
Resume work only after the symptoms disappear,
usually after several days. When you resume work,
improve your safety precautions to prevent exposure
to epoxy, its vapors, and sanding dust. If problems
persist, discontinue use and consult a physician.
2. Protect your eyes from contact with resin, hardeners,
mixed epoxy, and sanding dust by wearing appro-
priate eye protection. If epoxy gets in your eyes,
immediately flush them with water under low
pressure for 15 minutes. If discomfort persists,
seek medical attention.
3. Avoid breathing concentrated vapors and sanding
dust. All of our epoxies have a low volatile organic
content (VOC), but vapors can build up in unvented
spaces. Provide ample ventilation when working with
epoxy in confined spaces, such as boat interiors. When
you can’t adequately ventilate your workspace, wear
an approved respirator with an organic vapor cartridge. 
Provide ventilation and wear a dust/mist mask or
respirator when sanding epoxy, especially partially
cured epoxy. Breathing partially cured epoxy dust
increases your risk of sensitization. Although epoxy
Chapter 10 – Safety
81

--- PAGE 96 ---
cures quickly to a sandable solid, it may take over two
weeks at room temperature, or elevated-temperature
post-curing, to cure completely.
4. Avoid ingesting epoxy. Wash thoroughly after
handling epoxy, especially before eating or smoking.
If you swallow epoxy, drink large quantities of water.
DO NOT induce vomiting. Hardeners are corrosive
and can cause additional harm if vomited. Call a
physician immediately. Refer to First Aid procedures
on the Material Safety Data Sheet. 
5. Keep your workshop clean to avoid incidental
contact. Avoid touching door handles, light switches,
and containers when you have epoxy residue on
your gloves because you may touch them later
without gloves on. Clean up spills with a scraper,
collecting as much material as possible. Follow up
with absorbent towels. Use sand, clay, or other inert
absorbent material to contain large spills. DO NOT
use sawdust or other fine cellulose materials to
absorb hardeners. Clean resin or mixed epoxy
residue with acetone, lacquer thinner, or alcohol.
Follow all safety warnings on solvent containers.
Clean hardener residue with warm soapy water.
You may reclaim uncontaminated resin or hardener
for use. DO NOT dispose of hardener in trash
containing sawdust or other fine cellulose materials
—they can spontaneously combust.
6. Safely dispose of resin, hardener, and empty con-
tainers. Puncture a corner of the can and drain
residue into the appropriate new container of resin
or hardener. Do not dispose of resin or hardener as
liquids. Mix and cure waste resin and hardener (in
small quantities) to make a non-hazardous inert solid.
CAUTION! Pots of curing epoxy can get hot enough
to ignite surrounding combustible materials and give
off hazardous fumes. Place pots of mixed epoxy in
a safe and ventilated area, away from workers and
combustible materials. Dispose of the solid mass only
after it has completely cured and cooled. Follow
federal, state or local disposal regulations.
Other Epoxy-Related Hazards
Uncontrolled Curing and Burning of Epoxy
The chemical reaction that cures mixed epoxy is
exothermic, or heat generating. If left to cure in a
contained mass, such as in a mixing pot, it can generate
enough heat to melt plastic, burn your skin, or ignite
surrounding combustible materials. The larger or thicker
the epoxy mass, the more heat generated. A 100-gram
mass of mixed epoxy can reach 400°F (204°C).
To prevent heat buildup, transfer epoxy from the mixing
pot to a roller pan or other wide, shallow container. Fill
large cavities with epoxy in multiple layers rather than
in a single, thick layer. Heat buildup and uncontrolled
curing are unlikely in typical bonding and coating jobs
because spreading the epoxy into thinner layers dissi-
pates heat.
Mixed resin and hardener become hot and frothy as
they thermally decompose, generating toxic vapors.
These include carbon monoxide, oxides of nitrogen,
ammonia, and possibly some aldehydes. Cured epoxy
can emit similar vapors if you heat it too much. This
can happen when you use a flame to release epoxy-
mounted hardware. To reduce this risk, use just enough
heat to release the hardware. Only as a last resort
should you use a flame to burn epoxy from hardware.
If you must do so, work in a well-ventilated area. 
While leftover mixed epoxy cures, set the container
aside where you can monitor it. Use a fan to disperse
vapors and direct them away.  Air purifying respirators
may not be effective against these vapors.
Spontaneous combustion is a danger when hardeners
are mixed with sawdust, wood chips, or other cellulosic
materials. When hardener is spilled onto or mixed with
sawdust, the air and moisture react with the amine to
generate heat. If the heat is not dissipated quickly
enough, it can ignite the sawdust. Do not use sawdust
or other cellulosic materials to absorb a hardener spill.
Likewise, do not pour unused hardener into a trash
can with sawdust or other cellulosic materials.
WEST SYSTEM epoxy resin and hardeners are classified
non-flammable because their flash points are greater
than 200°F (93°C) and they evaporate slowly. Furnaces,
wood stoves, and other heat sources do not pose a
serious fire hazard in the presence of epoxy vapors. 
Spraying Epoxy
We do not recommend spraying epoxy products
because the health and safety risks are enormous. As
epoxy leaves a spray gun nozzle, it is reduced to tiny
droplets (spray mist). You can easily inhale epoxy that
82
Getting Started

--- PAGE 97 ---
is suspended in the air. It can cause extensive lung
damage and other health problems. The spray mist can
settle on your skin, causing sensitization and allergic
reactions. It can settle on your eyes, injuring them.
Compared to other application methods, spraying
increases the amount of hazardous volatile components
released from the epoxy. Using solvents to thin the epoxy
for spraying adds to the health and safety risks. These
hazards are similar to those of any spray painting opera-
tion, involving both health and flammability concerns.
If you are determined to spray epoxy, control hazardous
vapor and spray mist by using isolation and enclosure,
such as a properly designed, ventilated, and filtered spray
booth. In any case, if you spray epoxy, you must use an
air-supplied respirator and full-body protective clothing!
Shop Hazards
Solvents
Many solvents pose serious health and safety hazards,
and the government is increasingly regulating worker
exposure and overall usage. Epoxy users commonly use
solvents to dissolve epoxy from tools and to degrease
surfaces before bonding. Solvents’ ability to dissolve
and degrease is part of why they are hazardous to your
health. They leach oils from the skin and break down
protective fatty layers. This makes skin more susceptible
to dermatitis. While dermatitis is the most common skin
problem solvents cause, it doesn’t stop there.
Once solvents have penetrated the protective skin
layers, they may quickly find their way into the blood
stream. You can absorb toxic amounts in this way. If
you use solvent to clean epoxy from your skin, your
skin can absorb both the solvent and the dissolved
epoxy. This will intensify epoxy exposure. 
Almost all solvents are toxic if you swallow, absorb, or
inhale enough. Solvents can irritate your respiratory
system, eyes, and skin. Some solvents may damage your
heart, liver, and other vital organs. Several solvents have
been linked to cancer.
Repeatedly inhaling low to moderate levels of solvents
can irritate the respiratory tract. Because of their drying
effect, solvents can also interfere with the lungs’ natural
ability to clean themselves of impurities. When inhaled
in high concentrations, solvents may depress the central
nervous system. This is called narcosis. Symptoms of
overexposure range from nausea and irritability
to something that resembles alcohol intoxication.
Continued overexposure to particularly toxic solvents
can lead to loss of consciousness, permanent brain
damage, and death.
Some solvents give off a strong odor when highly
concentrated, while others do not. Even for those that
do, you may not notice the odor after you are exposed
to it for a few hours or if you have a cold. If you notice
a strong odor while using a solvent, vapors may already
be too highly concentrated, and you will need to venti-
late more or use a supplied-air respirator. Many milder
solvents are being developed to replace the more hazar-
dous solvents. If the solvent manufacturer claims its
product can be used on the skin, you should follow
instructions carefully and wash afterwards with warm,
soapy water.
OSHA sets Permissible Exposure Limits (PELs) for
chemicals, based on the amount or vapor level a
worker can safely be exposed to in a given time period.
The American Conference of Governmental Industrial
Hygienists also sets exposure levels based on an 8-hour
time-weighted average, called Threshold Limit Values or
TLVs. These values are expressed in parts of contaminant
per million parts of air. Figure 10-1 provides examples
of PELs for some commonly used industrial solvents. 
Preventing Overexposure to Solvents
1. Always select the least toxic and least flammable
solvent that will get the job done. Avoid solvents
completely if at all possible.
2. Do not smoke or use equipment that may generate
sparks near solvent vapors or solvent storage areas.
Store solvents in tightly closed, approved containers.
Store them a safe distance from any ignition source
and out of children’s reach.
3. Use solvents only in well-ventilated areas. Bring fresh
air into your shop and exhaust solvent laden air. In
confined areas, wear the appropriate respiratory
protection. If you can, set up a basic mechanical
ventilation scheme for all projects calling for solvents.
4. Take special care in hot weather when solvents
evaporate quickly and are more likely to ignite.
5. Do not operate power machinery or climb ladders if
you have been working with solvents in a confined
Chapter 10 – Safety
83

--- PAGE 98 ---
area. If you feel drowsy, nauseated, “high” or irritable
while using solvents, immediately move to an area of
fresh air. First aid for unconsciousness resulting from
overexposure to solvent vapors is fresh air.
Solvent and Dust Fire Hazards
Most solvents are extremely flammable. By themselves,
in paints, or in other products, solvents cause many
shop fires. The fire hazards that solvents pose may be
their greatest threat both to human health and property.
You must follow basic shop safety rules whenever you
use them. Research the flash points and evaporation
rates and use adequate ventilation. Remove all ignition
sources. Figure 10-1 lists some important comparative
health and flammability information for solvents
commonly used in the shop.
An explosion can happen when solvent vapors mix
with high concentrations of fine dust particles sus-
pended in the air. Even by itself, wood dust is explosive.
The finer the dust particle, the greater the chance of
explosion. Also, as temperatures increase, an explosion
can happen at lower solvent vapor concentrations. One
worker, hand sanding, could not raise enough dust to
cause an explosion, but several people operating power
sanding equipment could. 
An open flame can set off an explosion, as can an
accidental ch