system demands a little more work but
ensures that any parts made from the lofting will
already have the planking thickness subtracted from
them. Slight inaccuracies creep in as you subtract
planking thickness. However, if the process takes place
before the diagonals, buttocks, and waterlines are used
to check and fair the body plan sections, these inaccu-
racies will be faired out. The end result is a slightly
fairer, more accurate shape when the molds and the
bulkheads are set up.
In some hulls, however, such as wineglass sections, 
you might feel more secure if you subtracted planking
thickness after the hull has been faired to eliminate any
complication that might arise in fairing the deadwood
into the hull.
The procedure for subtracting planking thickness is the
same whether you do it before or after fairing the body
plan. If you decide to subtract the planking thickness
before you fair the body plan, take the steps outlined
below after you have laid down the body plan but
before you have picked up any waterlines, buttocks, or
diagonals to fair it.
On long, thin hulls, such as multihulls with their thin
skins, there is no problem in subtracting the actual
planking thickness directly from the molds and frames.
However, on boats with thicker planking and/or more
abrupt curves, some problems can arise if the same
amount of planking thickness is subtracted from all of
the station sections. If you take a station somewhere in
the middle of the boat, it intersects the planking at close
to right angles. If you measured the planking across the
angle at which this station intersects it, it would measure
the same as the actual thickness of planking that is
used. However, if you measured a station close to the
bow, where the planking comes across that station at a
considerable angle, say 20°, you would find that the
measurement would be considerably more than the
thickness of the planking. This extra amount would
have to be subtracted from the station at that point so
that when the boat is planked, the outside dimension
will be the same as the final loftings. Although there are
different ways of subtracting planking thickness, all of
them require that you find the bevel angle of the station
and measure the distance through the planking stock at
that angle. The distance measured across the angle of
the planking stock is the amount subtracted from the
station section at that point.
The first step is to make a master bevel board. This is 
a tool that you can keep around the shop and use for
various projects, so it’s worth making a good one. Take
a square piece of plywood about 1⁄4" (6mm) thick, with
its sides at least as long as the greatest station spacing
on the boat you are lofting. We usually make it a little
bigger so that it will fit most projects and recommend a
3' (1m) square as a good size. Place a point of the bar
compass in one corner of the square and draw a 90° arc
of the largest radius possible. (See Figure 16-12.) Next,
divide this arc or quadrant into 90 parts, each repre-
senting one degree. Accurate work is important. Start
by dividing the arc into three parts of 30°. Then divide
one 30° arc into six parts of 5°. Then divide one of
these 5° parts into 1° marks. Make a quick template,
using the construction you have just done, to divide the
other two 30° sectors into six parts of 5°. Then divide
all the marks into 1° marks. Now you need a straight

--- PAGE 197 ---
Chapter 16 – Lofting
183
stick that will reach diagonally across the square. Draw
in and label the lines every 5°. Because this bevel board
will be permanent, use a ballpoint pen.
The side of the square that goes from the center to the
0° mark will be the baseline. Mark off the station
spacing from the center along the baseline, and at that
point construct a perpendicular line. Draw the line 
in, using light pencil. Next, mill a piece of wood that 
is longer than the greatest distance between station
sections on the body plan, making it about 1⁄8" (3mm)
thick and the exact width of the thickness of planking
that will go on the boat. Lay this stick on your bevel
board so that one edge touches the vertical station line
and the bottom of the stick touches the baseline. Use a
couple of small tacks to hold it in place. Using a small
straightedge, transfer all of the angular lines across the
stick and label them. Be sure to mark the edge of the
stick that is touching the station line.
Take the stick to the body plan as shown in Figure 16-
13. Let’s say you want to deduct the planking thickness
from station 4 at a point on the topsides. Lay the stick
so that its base touches station 4 at this point and it is
projecting at right angles to station 4, and read the
degree line closest to station line 3. Let’s say that it is
20°. Now, place the base of the stick on station 4 so
that it is projecting at right angles and read the degree
line closest to station 5. Let’s say it is 14°. The bevel at
that point on station 2 would be the average of these
two readings, 17°. The planking thickness deducted
would be the distance measured across the stick at that
17° angle. (Remember, the stick is the same width as
the planking.) Figure 16-14 shows two methods of
subtracting this dimension.
In the first method, we adjust a compass to the distance
and swing an arc off at the labeled bevel as along
stations 1 and 2 in our example. In the second method,
we rotate the stick as we mark the bevels and carefully
tick off the distance using the stick itself as shown on
station 4. The measurement, of course, is made at right
angles to the section line.
If two station sections are close to parallel all the way
from the sheer to the keel, you can subtract the same
Figure 16-12 A master bevel board.
Perpendiculars are various station perpendiculars
Degree stick
Mark the degrees using the straightedge over the bevel
board. Be sure to note the proper control edge and station
spacing.
Figure 16-13  Determining mold bevels using a degree stick.
Bevel from station 4 to station 3 is 20°.
Bevel from station 4 to station 5 is 14°.
Mean angle for these two is 17°.
This would be the bevel for the
station 4 mold at this point.
These bevels should be taken at 90° to the section.

--- PAGE 198 ---
thickness from the station everywhere. Otherwise, in
just about every hull shape, a calculation made for
planking thickness subtraction about every 6" (150mm)
is adequate. In the few midships sections, you will find
the bevel angle so low that there is very little difference
between true planking thickness and the amount that
has to be subtracted, so most loftsmen don’t bother to
calculate extra planking thickness deduction at very low
bevel angles in the midships sections. You can write the
bevel angles down on the stations at the same time that
you do the planking thickness deduction work. After
you have finished marking the planking thickness
deduction from the station, place a batten on the tick
marks and draw in the reduced station shape.
Subtracting the planking thickness from the stem is
slightly trickier. At this point, if you are subtracting
planking thickness before the longitudinals are faired,
you need to draw a buttock on the body plan 6"
(150mm) from the centerline and pick up the distances
for the forward third of this buttock. Then lay it out on
the profile view. If you are subtracting planking thick-
ness after having faired all the hull lines, this buttock is
most easily projected up off the half breadth plan. (See
Figure 16-15.) Draw a line at right angles from the
profile stem at a point where the stem intersects a water-
line, extending the line aft to the point where it intersects
the profile of the 6" buttock (as in detail A). Draw a line
perpendicular to this first line at the point where it
intersects the buttock. Measure out 6" and make a mark
(as in detail B). At the point where the first line and the
stem intersect, measure out the half width of the stem
at right angles and put a mark (see detail C). Connect
this mark with the upper mark. You should now have a
reasonably accurate sectional view of the stem. If you
lay the stick that is equal in width to the thickness of
the planking beside this line and draw a parallel line,
you will have the shape of the stem minus the planking
thickness. (See detail D.)
Next, fair a profile line for the new inner stem, using
the points established in the stem section views you
have just completed. (See detail E.) If you are
subtracting planking thickness before fairing the hull
lines, you will now have a view of the inner stem to
which you can fair the waterlines.
184
First Production Steps
Figure 16-15  Determining bevels and planking thickness
deduction for the inner stem.
Figure 16-14  Two methods for subtracting planking 
thickness for.
Mark the proper bevels on your
stations in the body plan. Set a
compass for the distance along
the appropriate bevel on your
degree stick. Swing arcs on the
corresponding bevel marks in the
body plan.
While marking the 
bevels on the body plan, 
carefully rotate the degree stick 
until the appropriate bevel on the
stick is perpendicular to the point being
measured. Tick off this dimension on the
body plan. In this example, the stick is
rotated for the 17° bevel on station 4.
6" Buttock shown in
profile view
Half width of
stem face
Marking stick witness
marks should be 6"
(or same as buttock
spacing)
Fair the 
inner stem profile
Project the 6" buttock up from the
Half breadth plan

--- PAGE 199 ---
Chapter 16 – Lofting
185
The only other area where there might be some confu-
sion in subtracting planking thickness is in the last
station aft, where there is not another station with
which to average the angle. For planking thickness
subtraction, the one angle will be close enough. If you
want to bevel the last station from the lofting, you will
have to allow for a few degrees because the planking
will be curving as it comes into that station.
This completes the basic lofting. You should now have
the exact shapes of the desired stations from which you
can cut the mold frames, permanent frames, bulkheads,
transom, and other manufactured parts.

--- PAGE 200 ---
186
First Production Steps

--- PAGE 201 ---
The material in this chapter and the next are related, and reading the two together will help clarify some of
the more complicated concepts presented below. With a few minor exceptions, this chapter is unchanged
from the original edition.
Boat construction begins when lofting is complete. The
first steps, building frames for each lofted station and
setting them up on a foundation, are discussed here
and in Chapter 18. Since you may wish to approach
these jobs simultaneously, we recommend that you read
through both chapters before you start. As you do this,
note that most wood composite boats, even very large
ones, are built keel up and sheer down.
Although we refer to station frames and assume that
you are placing your frames along the station lines, you
may in fact use any regularly spaced lines along your
hull. We use station lines because they are already
drawn in the lofting and are therefore convenient. In
cases where a permanent frame is close to a station, you
may use it instead of a station frame and add an extra
mid-station mold frame to support planking. If at any
time in the set-up process you decide to add a mold
frame, draw it into your lofting as you would a station
line. An auxiliary grid with only a few lines is a good
place to do this sort of special work.
There are two basic types of frames. Mold frames are
assembled to make a form over which to bend the
planking or stringers of a mold or hull. Mold frames are
removed from the finished hull and so are sometimes
referred to as temporary or dummy frames. Permanent
frames, on the other hand, are attached to the hull
skin during the manufacturing process. They are incor-
porated into the finished hull and are not used to
construct molds. Bulkheads, ribs, and other compo-
nents that are installed in the set-up are considered
permanent frames.
Some hulls are built over mold frames only and the
ribs, bulkheads, and other transverse pieces are fitted
and installed afterwards. Other boats are built over
permanent frames only. Quite often, however, combina-
tions of mold and permanent frames are used. Many
hulls built using WEST SYSTEM® Brand epoxy and
laminating techniques do not have enough transverse
structural members to constitute a mold and some
temporary mold frames have to be used. We always aim
to build as many transverse elements as practical into
the mold frame set-up. This requires less labor than
installing the items after the hull skin has been formed,
and the results are usually better.
Planning Permanent Frames
With careful planning, you can substitute many perma-
nent parts for temporary mold frames. Among the
transverse pieces to be permanently installed in a hull
are such things as bulkheads, sides of lockers, supports
for berths, ribs for engine bed support, laminated floors
for through-bolting ballast keels—any pieces that run
athwartship or at right angles to planking or stringers.
Make a list of all such items while your project is still in
the planning stage and judge which ones can reason-
ably be jigged into the set-up and how. You will
probably find that few, if any, of the pieces are
positioned on a station line, so you will have to loft
most, if not all, as extra stations. However, they may
have to be lofted anyway, whether you put them into
the set-up or fit them after you lay the planking.
Full bulkheads are probably the easiest parts to include
in a set-up because they outline the entire hull perimeter,
just like a full mold frame. If the bulkhead happens to
be reasonably close to a station, you can omit the mold
frame for that station if you judge that the planking 
will be properly supported and will form fairly. If the
bulkhead is more or less dead center between two
stations, then you will probably have to include the
mold frames for both stations.
As you plan permanent frames, give some thought to
jigging design. All pieces in the set-up—permanent or
temporary—will be supported by vertical legs. Your job
Mold Frames and Permanent Frames
C H A P T E R
17

--- PAGE 202 ---
will be to arrange these legs so that they don’t get in the
way of each other. You can cut out the centers of mold
frames to allow bracing to pass through them, but you
cannot hollow out bulkheads. Instead, plan to run
diagonal braces for bulkheads through companionways
and other cutouts.
Another point to consider in the set-up you are
putting a bulkhead in is whether it protrudes above
the sheer (such as one that might form the back of 
a cabin above the deck line). If so, the set-up will
have to be high enough off the floor or strongback 
to leave room for this.
Many other items that can be included in the set-up are
smaller than a bulkhead and will only span a portion 
of the hull perimeter. In these cases, you cannot allow
these pieces to substitute for an entire mold frame,
though it may be possible to build partial mold frames
that can provide complete support in conjunction with
a partial frame member.
Other considerations that are necessary if you are going
to install permanent structures in the set-up will be
discussed later in the chapter. First, however, will come 
a discussion of mold frame construction.
Mold Frames
Our favorite mold frame material is particleboard, 
also known as chipboard or pressed wood board. It’s
inexpensive, dimensionally stable, and has no grain. A
4'  8' (1200m  2400m) sheet of 3⁄4" (18mm)
chipboard is readily available because it is widely used
as subflooring in residential construction, and a single
sheet is usually large enough to make both halves of a
mold frame.
Mold frames may also be made of 3⁄4" (18mm) lumber, 
4" to 10" (100mm to 250mm) wide. If you use stock,
you will generally have to cut station line shapes out of
several pieces and then join them together with
plywood gussets.
The main job of any mold frame is to hold the shape 
of the boat. So long as it is strong enough to do this, a
dummy frame may be open in the center, like a large
horseshoe, or closed, with material more or less solidly
arranged across the station. Once structural considera-
tions are met, the only difference between frame
designs is that it may be easier to attach legs to solid
frames than to open ones.
Transferring the Shape
Unless a designer specifies otherwise, you will need 
to cut out mold frames for every station in the lofting.
The shape of the frame for each particular station is the
shape represented in the body plan of the lofting. Some
designers may specify extra mold frames in areas of
acute planking curve. These are usually referred to as
half mold frames and are located midpoint between
stations.
The body plan shows only a half shape of each station,
so you will have to cut out each station shape twice and
then join the two halves together to form the full
station. However, cut only half of each mold frame by
the line transfer methods we are about to describe.
Cut out the other halves using the original halves as
patterns. The reason for this will be explained later
under the subject of controlling edges. Whichever
type of frame you use, remember to subtract planking
thickness from your lofted station lines before transfer-
ring them to your mold stock. It may also be necessary
to subtract the thickness of mold planking. These
deductions from your lofting may be substantial. To
build a 1⁄2" (12mm) thick hull on a mold with 3⁄4"
(18mm) thick ribbands, you will use half mold frames
that are 11⁄4" (30mm) “thinner” than your station
lines—so pay close attention to the planking thickness
deduction procedure outlined in Chapter 16.
The trickiest part of making mold frames is transferring
the station line shape from the lofting floor to the mold
frame material. As far as we know, there are four ways
of doing this. One method of transfer is to loft the body
plan on a portable board and then saw the board up
into templates. Naturally, this won’t work if the station
lines cross each other or even if they are very close
together. We can only recommend this method if you
loft the body plan twice, giving one lofting to cut up
and leaving one for reference.
A second method is to use tracing paper through which
you can see the lines. Spread the paper on the lofting
floor and trace the station lines either freehand or with
a batten. Then move the paper to the mold frame
material and make pick marks through it onto the
188
First Production Steps

--- PAGE 203 ---
frame stock. The easy way to do this is to use a pounce
or tracing wheel, but you may also use a pin or a nail.
Connect the pick marks into a line with a batten.
The third and most popular method of transferring
lines is the nail method illustrated in Figure 17-1. For
this, you need thick-shanked nails with small, sharp-
edged heads. Small box nails work well. Position these
on their sides on the lofting floor, so that the shanks are
at right angles to and the edges of the heads rest on the
station lines. Hold a nail by its point and tap the side of
its shank with a small hammer until the shank is flat in
the floor and close to half of the head is buried. Sink
nail heads in this way at several points along the station
lines, adding more in critical areas such as sharp curves
or chines until you have a good outline of protruding
nail heads. Then, place your frame material over the
lofting and gently walk on it to press the nail heads into
the stock. Remove the mold material and use a batten
to connect the nail head impressions into a line.
We have developed a fourth method, shown in Figures
17-2 and 17-3, of marking mold frames. This technique
requires making special battens and batten holders, 
and therefore takes a little extra time, but it gives fast,
accurate results. The holders are screwed or notched
onto long, thin battens which are anchored in place on
the lofting. We can push mold frame material under
this assembly for marking.
You may need more than one batten, especially if 
the sharpness of your curves varies considerably from
station to station. Make each one out of a straight,
flexible wood such as ash. Batten thickness depends 
on the degree of curvature of your station lines: each
batten should flex comfortably along the lines on which
it will be used.
Next, cut eight or so pieces of wood to approximately
11⁄2"  1"  18" (38mm  25mm  450mm). These
are your batten holders. Drill one or two holes for nails
at one end of each piece. You can use any long, thin
nails you have on hand as long as they slip through
these holes easily with no slop, so be sure that your drill
is the same size as the shank diameter of your nails. Cut
a thin wedge out of the bottom of each stick, beginning
Chapter 17 – Mold Frames and Permanent Frames
189
Figure 17-1 The nail method for picking up mold sections from the lofting.
The mold stock is carefully placed on the
positioned nail heads and pressure is applied.
When the mold stock is removed from the
body plan, the nails (or the imprint) should
outline the shape of the section on the stock.
Nail heads are placed along
the section line and tapped
into the surface of the floor.

--- PAGE 204 ---
where the piece will attach to the batten and rising over
its length to within an inch or so of your nail hole or
holes. This trimming will allow the batten to drop
down onto the frame stock.
Finally, decide how you will attach your holders to your
battens. If you want to use roundhead wood screws,
drill holes in the tapered end of each holder and every
six inches along the length of your battens. Place flat
washers under the screws as you insert them and
tighten only enough to eliminate slop. If you choose to
use notches, cut them in the holders to fit your various
battens. Each holder can be notched twice, once for a
thin batten and once for a thicker one.
When this is done, your device is ready to use. Start by
attaching batten holders every foot or so along your
batten. Try to align the inner edge of the batten along
the station shape and anchor the holders outside the
line with nails through the drilled holes. Don’t drive the
nails flush: you want them to give a little, and you will
have to pull them out to move on to the next station
anyway. Add more holders as needed until the batten is
accurately lined up.
Once you have properly aligned the batten and set the
nails, you are ready to insert the mold frame material.
You usually have to roughly trim the mold frame edge
so that there is no excess material in the way of the
190
First Production Steps
Figure 17-2  Using batten holders to transfer lofted sections to mold frame stock.
Notches for different size battens
Batten holder
Oversize nail holes
Body Plan
Offset to allow clearance for mold stock.
Mold frame stock
Increase the number of batten holders in
areas of severe bend.

--- PAGE 205 ---
nails. When the frame material is in the best position,
let the batten back down and trace the station shape by
running a pencil along the inside of the batten. Make
sure the pencil is sharp so that you can mark the line
right up to the batten.
Controlling Edges
After you have drawn the lines on the frame stock, but
before you begin cutting, label the piece with its station
number. Use a felt tip pen and make sure that you
mark on the side on which you’ve drawn the lines. 
This is the control side of your frame. The edge of this
surface is the controlling edge of your frame.
The reason for establishing a controlling edge is
straightforward. It is difficult to keep a hand-held saw
blade perpendicular to the material it is cutting at all
times. When the blade cants, the top and bottom
surfaces of the piece have different outlines. It’s there-
fore best, when sawing, to concentrate on following a
line on one surface. This way, you can cut one side of
the material true to form and there’s no confusion about
which lines to rely on. Marking helps to keep track of
which side is the control side.
When it’s time to set up the frames, control sides are
aligned with station lines drawn on a floor or with
notch marks on a strongback. To facilitate beveling, the
thickness of the mold frame material and the width of
the anchoring blocks below go on the side of the line
towards the bow or stern, whichever is nearer. At the
center station, the mold frame material goes on which-
ever side you have chosen to put the anchoring blocks.
This changeover point usually occurs at the widest part
of the boat. With this arrangement, anchoring blocks
and mold frame material end up on one side of the
station line, with the legs that connect them on the
other side. The controlling edge of the mold frame is
then in a vertical plane above the station line.
We must mention that some builders do just the
opposite of the above by placing the anchoring blocks
and mold frame material on the inside of the station
line and the legs on the outside. In this way the mold
frame edges do not have to be beveled to let the
planking down to the controlling edge. We believe,
however, that beveling mold frames is better, especially
if the planking is stiff and, in bending, will put a lot of
pressure on the frame. If a thin edge is all that there is
to resist the pressure, a certain amount of local crushing
is bound to occur, and the crushing in effect will result
in a distortion of the true edge. Unfortunately, the
crushing is unlikely to be uniform throughout the set-
up, and so the planking may not be as fair as it could
have been if the mold were beveled, which gives the
planking support over the width of the frame material.
Mold Frame Halves
Cut out the mold frames with a hand-held saber saw, a
band saw or any handsaw that can follow a curved line.
After you have cut out all the first halves of the frames,
take them back to the lofting floor and place them on
their respective stations to check for any discrepancies.
Make sure that you have a frame for each station and
that each is properly numbered. You will inevitably
need to hand trim edges. Block planes, sharp files, and
coarse sandpaper on a block all work well for this. Use
the controlling edges of these frame halves as patterns
to mark the material for cutting the other halves.
Earlier we stated it was imperative that only half of each
station mold frame be cut out by transferring the line
from the lofting floor. The reason for this is that the
control sides of the second halves have to be mirror
images of the original sides. Except in the case of the
tracing paper method, in which paper can just be
turned over, it is not possible to get both a straight
Chapter 17 – Mold Frames and Permanent Frames
191
Figure 17-3 Transferring deck camber for a bulkhead from
lofting to plywood stock using a batten and holders.

--- PAGE 206 ---
image and a mirror image with any of the line transfer
methods. Therefore it is necessary to use the original
half-mold as a pattern for the other half in order to get
the control sides on the same sides when you truss the
halves together.
Once the second halves are cut out, mark them for
control sides and number them. Check them against
the lofting or the original halves for accuracy and
numbering.
Assembling the Mold Frames
The two halves of a mold frame are held together with
a plywood gusset in the area of the keel and with a
spall. A spall usually spans the mold frame at the
highest waterline of the station. We find that it’s most
efficient to prepare these pieces in advance and bond
and mark as many as possible in a single operation on
the lofting floor.
You can make the gusset out of 1⁄4" or 3⁄8" (6mm or
9mm) plywood. Cut it out in the approximate shape 
of the lower 12" (300mm) of the station. The gussets
should be of generous size so that they give plenty of
support. It is best not to place them up to the edge of
the mold frame, but to keep them an inch away from
the edges. You will eventually bevel the edges, and
there is no good reason to include the gussets in the
beveling operation.
Spalls are usually made of either 1"  4" or 1"  6"
(19mm  89mm or 19mm  140mm) boards, well
seasoned so that they will not shrink or swell at some
point after installation. Every spall must have one long,
straight edge, for in addition to functioning as bracing
members, spalls are applied so that one edge serves as a
set-up reference line. Although it makes no difference
in many cases, it’s usually better to place a spall with its
straight edge facing up in the set-up. This way, you can
set a level on top of it for reference and better see the
edge when you measure. Keep the ends of a spall in 1"
or 1⁄2" (25mm or 12mm) from the edges of the mold
frame so they do not interfere with the fairing of bevels.
The greater the distance a spall must span, the greater
the chances of its becoming unstable. Instability will
destroy its usefulness as a reference line. If the boat 
you are building has a great deal of beam, you should
probably support the spall toward the center with
trusses running at an angle to the mold frame. An 
alternative is to position the spall slightly away from 
the reference waterline and to stretch a string across 
the waterline marks. You can then use the string for
reference during setting up.
To truss the two halves of the mold frame together,
place the frames control side down on the lofting floor.
Only one half will fit into the body plan lofting. The
other half, being a mirror image, goes on the other side
of the lofting centerline. To locate this half in symmetry,
you have to measure the offset of the highest waterline
(the distance from the centerline to the body plan line)
and transfer it out in the opposite direction.
Make a tick mark or drive in a small nail and locate the
mirror half out to this mark. Also butt the two halves at
the keel.
Then apply the gusset to the non-control side of the
mold frames. Bond the gusset in place with thickened
epoxy, using screws, nails or staples as fasteners.
Recheck the position of the two halves, and then you
are ready to apply the spall. Before the spall goes on,
however, you must draw a line against which to align
the straight edge of the spall. Use two small squares
and place their edges sitting vertically on the waterline
on the lofting floor. Then use the spall itself as a
straightedge and push it gently against the two squares.
When it is in position, draw against the spall’s edge,
across the face of the mold frames. Use this line to
reposition the spall when you permanently install it
with adhesive and fasteners.
192
First Production Steps
Figure 17-4 Fitting and assembling frames for a double chine
trimaran hull on lofted sections.

--- PAGE 207 ---
The fasteners become extraneous as soon as the epoxy
cures, but we recommend using them nevertheless to
speed things up. If you use fasteners, you can put
together the two halves of a mold frame, move the unit
out of the way, and immediately go on to the next pair
of mold halves. Without fasteners, the assembly will be
fairly fragile until the epoxy sets up. Handle all mold
frames gently until they have cured.
Note that if you build mold frames in the way we have
described, you may have to destroy them to get them
out of the finished hull. When stringers and sheer
clamps are notched into mold frames and covered with
layers of planking or veneer, the frames can be difficult
to remove. If you are building a one-off boat, you
Chapter 17 – Mold Frames and Permanent Frames
193
Figure 17-5  A typical mold frame with legs and spall installed and reference lines marked.
Figure 17-6 Bonding gussets to permanent frames.
Notches for keel, stringers and chines if appropriate
Plywood gusset
Waterline marks for reference
2" X 4"
Legs – joined edge fastened
to control face of mold
Centerline marks on spall and mold at keel
Straight edge
Notched for
sheer clamp
Sheer witness marks placed above actual sheer
a set distance to allow for clamp notches
Spall – joined on one edge
and positioned on waterline

--- PAGE 208 ---
probably won’t care about saving your frames, but if
you plan to use them again or give them to someone,
put them together with screws and through bolts rather
than epoxy so that they can be disassembled after the
hull is planked.
After bonding the gusset and spall, and before moving
the mold frame from the lofting, make reference marks.
The edge of the spall is one reference. Label it with the
number of the waterline it represents if you plan to use
different waterlines at different stations. Also mark the
centerline. To do this, place a straightedge over the
lofted centerline and use the two small squares, set on
edge as before, to transfer the line from the lofting to
the straightedge. Use the straightedge as a guide to
draw a line across the spall and the gusset.
Finally, you have to mark the sheer, but you can do this
on the edge of the mold frame, next to the lofting floor.
You do not need to raise these marks to the non-control
side of the material. As soon as you pick the frame up
off the floor, you can draw the sheer mark around onto
the control face. In fact, it is necessary to mark the
sheer lines on the control side, for if they were raised to
the non-control side, they might be out of position.
The sheer marks, unlike the waterline and centerline
references, are not used when setting up. They come
into play much later, during installation of the sheer
clamps. For this reason, the sheer marks should be
quite durable and easily identifiable so that there will
be no trouble finding them later on.
General Advice
If your boat will have longitudinal stringers notched
into its mold frames and these are marked on your
lofting, pick up the marks and bring them around to
control faces as you did with the sheer marks. Stringers
rarely run on waterlines, so picking them up on the
non-control side of a mold frame may result in distor-
tion. On all but long, narrow hulls with little angle
change, we suggest waiting until after the frames are set
up to cut notches. If you choose to cut them earlier,
plan carefully and make them a little small.
If your design calls for notching out the apex of the
frames to receive a keel, your gussets should be large
enough that they will not be weakened by the loss of
the notch material. Also, you will have less grief if you
keep nails and screws out of the way of notch sawing
lines. You can remove all nails or screws once the
adhesive cures, but inserting them so that they are out
of the way in the first place minimizes the difficulty.
Attaching the Legs
For virtually any boat, 2"  4" (38mm  89mm) 
legs are big enough and you can use smaller stock for
smaller boats. Legs don’t have to be made out of the
best lumber in the world, but every piece should be
joined straight and seasoned well enough to ensure that
it will remain reasonably straight. Fasten legs to the
control side of the mold frame with nails or screws and
epoxy. You can bond the legs in place whether you plan
to save the frames or not. If your molds disassemble
along the centerline, the legs will not get in the way
when you remove the frames from the planked hull.
The best procedure is to apply legs as parallel to the
centerline as possible so that you can use them during
set-up for plumb references. The control face of a 
mold frame is rarely flat, so it may not be a particularly
good place to set a level to see if the frame is plumb.
However, if the sides of the legs are straight and true
and parallel to the centerline, you can position the 
level against them.
When you have the legs and adjacent frame material in
vertical alignment, brace them with jigging. Straighten
up the mold frames when you install your sheer clamp,
stringers, keel, and other longitudinal members. Once
these pieces are in place, the controlling edges will be
close enough for practical purposes.
Attaching legs is no problem if you are using closed,
solid mold frames. It is easiest to do this when your
foundation-centering cable is in place. Erect lines
parallel to and at equal distances from the mold frame
centerline, on either side of this centerline. Space these
so that when the legs are attached, the centerline of the
mold frame will line up with the centerline of the founda-
tion and the legs will butt against the anchoring points.
You will probably not be able to attach legs all the way
up and down the control surface of an open frame.
Secure them to what mold frame there is and then also
to the spall. Since the spall’s surface is not in the same
plane as the control face, add shims to the spall on the
same side as the mold material in the area where the
194
First Production Steps

--- PAGE 209 ---
legs will cross it. Scraps of frame stock are, of course,
the perfect thickness for this. Erect the leg position
lines, in segments, across the mold frame and the
shims, and then apply the legs.
The height of the legs is arbitrary, but it must be
uniform throughout the stations. Choose a leg length
that will result in the hull being a convenient height to
work on. When the set-up is going to be on a floor,
rather than on a strongback, you need to cut off the legs
of all the mold frames so that the reference waterline
marks on the frames (if the same waterline is used as
reference throughout the stations) end up a uniform
distance above the reference cable (see Chapter 18). If
you use differing waterlines for reference on differing
stations, you will have to make allowances for these
distances in measuring the legs for cutoff.
On strongback set-ups, where there is clearance below
the anchoring blocks, you can allow the legs to run
past, but you should mark the distances to the top
surfaces of the anchoring blocks on the legs, provision-
ally, as a starting point when setting up the frames on
the strongback.
Permanent Frames
Earlier in this chapter we recommended that the thick-
ness of the mold frame material be placed outside the
station line so that you can bevel it to the contour of
the planking. We also pointed out that you have the
option of placing the mold frame material inside the
station line, eliminating the need for beveling, if you
feel the controlling edge is strong enough to withstand
pressure without distorting.
With permanent members, there is no option. All edges
have to be beveled carefully so that planking fits to
them all across their thickness. The process we use for
marking bevels with battens and a handsaw is described
in Chapter 18. This will work well on dummy frames
and permanent pieces alike, but we do suggest a more
cautious approach to the bevel on a permanent part.
In a set-up that includes both mold and permanent
frames, make the bevels on all of the mold frames first,
cutting bevels on permanent frames to an angle slightly
less than you know they’ll need. Even if you began with
a power plane, it’s a good idea to use a hand plane to
bring the bevel on a permanent frame to its final angle.
The use of battens across the set-up to check bevels
periodically as you are planing helps develop accuracy.
One reason to be careful as you bevel permanent
members is that if you cut too deeply, you may make
more work for yourself. If you over-bevel mold frames,
you can build them back up with thickened epoxy,
plywood strips, or whatever. It doesn’t make much
difference what a temporary frame looks like. The
appearance of a permanent frame, on the other hand, is
important, and a good fit between it and the planking is
necessary for both structural and aesthetic reasons.
Appearance also counts in installing spalls and legs on
permanent frames. These are positioned in exactly the
same way that they are on mold frames, but it may be
necessary to use fasteners instead of epoxy to hold them
in place during construction. Attaching legs to perma-
nent frames requires some extra attention. If the job is
not done neatly, the permanent members may bear
permanent, visible scars.
While WEST SYSTEM epoxy can be relied on to fill gaps
and span voids, your boat will be lighter, will look
better, and will be cheaper if you work your wood until
you have good fits. If you over-bevel, however, and the
choice is between throwing out your frame and building
it up with epoxy, you can use thickened epoxy to bridge
gaps. A good solution to larger mistakes is to bond in
shims of wood and reshape to the desired bevels.
To lay out a permanent transverse member, such as a
bulkhead or floor timber, loft a line to represent the
surface which is nearer the boat’s widest station. When
you cut out or laminate this piece, this becomes the
controlling edge. Locate the position of this line in the
foundation, as described in Chapter 18, and place
anchoring blocks accordingly.
Plans usually specify that bulkheads, locker sides, and
berth supports be built from a given thickness of sheet
plywood. It’s unusual to find a major bulkhead, say of
3⁄4" (18mm) plywood, held in place in the hull just by
bonding its edge to the planking. In most cases, cheek
pieces are positioned on one or both sides where the
plywood meets the planking. The cheek piece is bonded
to both the bulkhead and the planking to increase joint
surface area.
Chapter 17 – Mold Frames and Permanent Frames
195

--- PAGE 210 ---
We find that it’s best to laminate the cheek piece, bond
it to the bulkhead, and then put both pieces in the set-
up as a unit. If the cheek piece is on the changeover
side of the bulkhead, make it larger than the controlling
edge so that there will be enough material after beveling
for a good joint. If possible, however, bond cheek
pieces to the non-control side of a member so they 
will be somewhat easier to bevel.
Problems with Rough Fairing 
Permanent Frame Items
In the first stage of fairing, where you place the battens
over frames that have not yet been beveled, a difficulty
arises when permanent frames are included in the set-
up. When there are mold frames only, all of which are
of the same thickness of material, the non-controlling
edges are all in the same relative position to their corre-
sponding controlling edges, and so the rough fairing
works rather well. In other words, if the mold material
is, say, 5⁄8" (15mm) thick, the non-controlling edges will
all be more or less in line with the controlling edges
and 5⁄8" from them. The controlling and non-controlling
edges of permanent frames also will be in line with
each other, but they may be something other than 5⁄8"
apart. If this is so, fairing over non-control edges is
much more difficult.
The solution to this, in the case of pieces that are
thicker than the mold frame material, is to do a prelim-
inary bevel. Assume, for example, that a bulkhead
together with its cheek piece is 2" (50mm) thick and
that the mold frames are 5⁄8" thick. The technique is to
draw a line on the bulkhead-cheek piece 5⁄8" from its
controlling edge so that the fairing batten can rest on
the line. All of the material being removed is material
that would have to come off eventually anyway, so the
operation will cost little in time. Because the piece will
now have its 5⁄8" line exposed to contact with the batten,
you can rough fair the piece in with the rest of the
frames in the set-up.
Pieces that are less than the thickness of the mold frame
materials—and thankfully there will be few, if any, of
them—have to be shimmed to a thickness equal to that
of the other frames. Suppose the piece is 3⁄8" (9mm)
while the mold frames are 5⁄8" (15mm). You will have 
to find or mill something that is 1⁄4" (6mm) and apply it
to the piece’s non-controlling edge to build it out to 5⁄8"
(15mm). A movable piece, applied with two clamps
that you can shift around as you shift the batten, is
probably the best.
Precoating and Prefinishing
It’s easier to fabricate parts on the shop floor than inside
a hull. Accordingly, we suggest as much prefabrication
as possible. If you are working on a bulkhead, for
example, you might cut and frame companionways
before installing them in the set-up. Precoating with
WEST SYSTEM epoxy, as discussed in Chapter 15, is
usually quicker and the results are generally better than
coating after a piece is in place and the hull planked. Do
all the jobs you can before the piece goes into the set-up.
We have difficulty convincing builders of the merits of
precoating and prefinishing, and we think that this is
because prefinishing does not work in other boatbuilding
196
First Production Steps
Figure 17-7 Bonding cheek pieces to a permanent bulkhead.
Figure 17-8 Building a laminated transom with cheek pieces.

--- PAGE 211 ---
methods. In conventional construction, where paint
and varnish are used to coat surfaces and something
else is used as an adhesive, the various substances may
be incompatible. When you use wood/epoxy construc-
tion techniques, however, with WEST SYSTEM epoxy as
both a coating and an adhesive, the problems of incom-
patibility never arise. If you precoat a bulkhead or rib
with epoxy and then use the same epoxy to bond that
piece in the hull, it will form a homogeneous encapsu-
lation and joint. It does not matter that the epoxy
coating on the surface has cured at a different time than
the bonding adhesive, as long as you do a good surface
preparation.
Precoating saves time and it also protects pieces from
minor nicks and gouges. Cured WEST SYSTEM epoxy 
is very hard. It will resist a certain amount of errant
hammering and banging of jigging lumber. The coating
is not indestructible, however. It can be damaged, so try
to avoid hitting it.
If you have put a precoated bulkhead in the set-up and
adhesive squeezes out and runs down onto it as you
plank the hull, wipe off the excess epoxy, smooth it out,
or form it into a fillet before it cures. A beaded run
down the bulkhead will be unsightly, so wipe it up
before it sets. If a drip does cure, it isn’t a disaster; you
will just have a little extra sanding to do later, or you
can use a sharp cabinet scraper to remove the drip.
Chapter 17 – Mold Frames and Permanent Frames
197
Figure 17-9 Prefinishing permanent frames for a 60' (18m)
trimaran.
Figure 17-10 Permanent frames ready for set-up. These
frames have legs and spalls attached. They have been 
prefinished and notched for stringers.

--- PAGE 212 ---
198
First Production Steps

--- PAGE 213 ---
The use of an accurate laser level will greatly speed the frame set-up system described below. 
Setting up, the process of lining up frames on a founda-
tion so that they outline the lofted shape of the hull, is
one of the more exciting parts of boatbuilding. If your
lofting and frame construction are accurate, you will
finally begin to see the shape of your boat.
Begin setting up by choosing a foundation sturdy
enough to hold components in place until they are
fastened to each other and the hull is lifted away. This
may be the floor or it may be a strongback. Position
frames over the foundation, but not touching it. For
accuracy, you must locate frames exactly parallel to
each other and perpendicular to the centering cable, a
centerline which you will erect. When the frames are in
position, fasten their legs to anchoring blocks, assemble
permanent bracing between them and the foundation,
and bevel and fair the set-up to receive the planking.
The Foundation
If you are building on a dirt floor, you have little choice
but to build a strongback. If you have a wood or
concrete floor, you can use a strongback, but it’s not
necessary unless the floor is in poor condition. A
strongback is required if a concrete floor is so cracked
and heaved that it’s impossible to draw on it, or if a
wooden floor is of questionable strength. Otherwise,
the floor itself can serve as a foundation, and all you
have to do is sweep or vacuum it.
A strongback usually looks something like a ladder,
with rungs at every station line. All strongbacks are
pretty much alike except for the size and spacing of
their timbers. Your plans may include specifications, or
you may have to design your own. The following is a
general outline for construction.
To make a strongback, you need four timbers of equal
width and thickness. Two of the pieces—the longitu-
dinal members—should be slightly longer than the
overall length of the boat, and the other two—the cross
members—should be about two thirds of the boat’s beam.
Stock about 2"  12" (38mm  286mm) is heavy
enough for most hulls. It helps if all four timbers are
reasonably straight. Since they will be anchoring points
for a cable drawn to several hundred pounds of tension,
the shorter timbers should be fairly stiff. You will also
need 2"  4" (38mm  89mm) boards for the cross
pieces at the station lines.
Build a rectangle by boxing the ends of the two longitu-
dinal timbers with the shorter ones. The pieces should
be on their edges. If you are working on a concrete or
wood floor, screw lag bolts through the cross members
into the longitudinals. If you are working on a dirt
floor, you will be using stakes to hold the side pieces,
so you don’t need any fasteners. The 2"  4" station
line cross members will be installed later.
Place the strongback on the floor, seating the bottom
edges of the timbers so they won’t rock, shift or settle as
the weight of construction bears on them, and level it.
Although adjustments can be made later, when jigging
is attached to the timbers, you will save time by making
sure that the edges are level and at the same height at
this stage. Check for irregularities on a wood or concrete
floor and bond blocks in place as needed to support
the entire length of the strongback. If you are working
on dirt, scrape away high spots until the pieces sit
firmly and then drive sharpened 2"  4" s as far as
possible into the ground beside the ends of each
timber. Nail these stakes to the strongback to keep it
upright and to forestall settling.
Setting Up
C H A P T E R
18
Figure 18-1 The strongback and mold frames for a small
canoe. Note that it’s often a good idea to raise a small
strongback off the floor to a convenient working height.

--- PAGE 214 ---
The Centering Cable
Before setting up the frames and jigging, run a cable the
length of the boat to represent a centerline. This will be
the reference for aligning frames and measuring station
lines. If you are building a large boat and can borrow or
rent a transit, consider using it to make sure that your
cable is accurately laid.
A string will work for a centerline, but we prefer to
use 1⁄16" or 3⁄32" (1.5mm or 2mm) diameter wire rope
stretched to about 500-pounds (230kg) tension. The
cable stays taut and will not break or stretch if you trip
on it. If your foundation is the floor, run the centering
cable an inch (25mm) or less above it. If you are using
a strongback, run it above the cross pieces. Anchor the
centerline on guides outside bow and stern of the boat.
For longer hulls you may want to add slotted support
blocks at intervals along the length of the cable. Both
guides and blocks should be indestructible. Set them 
so that even the clumsiest feet can’t move them after
you’ve begun setting up.
The centerline must be level so frames can be set up
perpendicular to it. Use a line level, available at a
hardware store, to check it before finally fastening it.
Hang the level in the middle of the cable and raise or
lower one end of the cable until it is level. Turn the
level 180° to check in the other direction. If it’s level,
you’re done. 
When the cable is centered, put down the lines over
which to erect frames. Mold frames are usually positioned
on station lines, spaced as they are in the lofting grid. If
you are including permanent frames such as bulkheads
in the set-up, draw lines to position them.
Space the lines over which the frames are to be set up
exactly as they are on the lofting floor. You can use the
big lofting square to establish the lines perpendicular to
the centerline. Line the square up with the centerline at
each mold frame or permanent frame position and
mark the floor or timbers on each side. If you are not
using a strongback, draw the lines directly on the floor.
If you have a strongback, draw lines on it to represent
the station lines. These may not be at perfect right angles
to the timbers if the timbers are not parallel or if they
are warped, but they must be parallel to each other,
spaced from each other just as they are in the lofting,
and perpendicular to the centerline.
200
First Production Steps
Figure 18-2  A strongback arrangement for a dirt floor.
Centerline cable
2"  12" sides
2"  4" stakes
through bolted
Station marks
for mold frames
Measure out from the centerline
to square the stations marked
on side pieces.

--- PAGE 215 ---
Anchoring Blocks
When you have marked the lines and checked them 
for accuracy, make and install anchoring blocks or
cleats. These can usually be cut from 2"  4" (38mm
 89mm) stock, although a larger boat may require
larger blocks. If you are using a strongback, install the
2"  4" cross pieces, broad side down, at each station
line to make cross members which extend beyond
where the legs will intersect. If you are not using a
strongback, fasten the anchoring blocks directly to 
the floor. It isn’t necessary to put down lengths of 2" 
 4"—you can use two short pieces at each station,
placed broad side down at the point where the legs will
meet the floor. Leave the blocks a little long, so there
will be a margin for error and adjustment. With either
type of foundation, place the anchoring blocks flush
beside the lines marked for the frames. When you
install the legs, they will butt against the sides of the
blocks.
Always place anchoring blocks on the side of the line
toward the bow or the stern, whichever is nearer, with a
changeover point at the widest part of the hull. For the
forward half of the hull, the blocks go forward of the
line, and for the after half they go aft of the line. Blocks
on the station line at the changeover point can he placed
toward either the bow or the stern. If you use pairs of
blocks, they must both be on the same side of the line.
Fasten blocks to a strongback with nails and epoxy.
Fillet their edges with a thick mixture of epoxy and
high-density filler. Make fillets on two or three sides of
the block only, leaving open the side where the jigging
leg will be attached. Since most load is straight down
through the legs to the floor, little side load comes onto
these blocks at any time during construction. If your
foundation is the floor, edge filleting with no further
bonding will keep the blocks in place. The advantage 
of fillets is that you can heat them with a heat gun to
remove them when the project is finished.
Chapter 18 – Setting Up
201
Figure 18-3 A centering cable and anchor blocks.
2"  4" cleats nailed to the
floor. These should be positioned
with attention paid to control
surfaces on the mold frames.
2"  4" support block can be
used on long wire baselines. This
should be set with a transit to
minimize distortion of the wire.
Stations carefully
squared to centerline.
Centering Cable
Station Line
Station Line
Centerline projected and
marked on the floor.

--- PAGE 216 ---
Setting Up
The process of setting up frames has four objectives: 1)
to locate the controlling edges of the frames over the
corresponding station lines marked on the strongback
or floor, 2) to make the centerlines of the frames
plumb, fore and aft and athwartship, 3) to line up the
centerlines on the frames to the centering cable and 4)
to locate waterlines on the mold frames at specific
heights above the cable.
You either need two spirit levels or one spirit level and
one plumb bob to do a set-up. The plump bob and
level method is the more accurate and should be used
on any boat large enough to have accommodations.
With small boats, two levels can be used.
Three-foot (1m) levels are long enough, but you should
check them for accuracy and compensate for any error.
To check a level for horizontal accuracy, place it against
a wall, with the bubble between the reticles, and draw a
line the length of the instrument along its edge. Then
turn the level end-for-end and place it back along the
line. If the bubble is still in the reticles, the level is
accurate. If not, move the level until the bubble comes
into position and draw a second line along the edge of
the level. This line will intersect the first and the error
is one half the angle of the intersection. In other words,
if the lines are 1⁄4" apart 3' from the intersection, the
error is 1⁄8" for 3'. If you continue to use such a level,
write the amount of error and its direction on the
instrument itself. Check vertical accuracy in a similar
manner, but do not turn the instrument end-for-end.
Instead, just flop it over so that one side is against the
wall, and then check it again. If a level has several spirit
tubes, check each one. One or two may be accurate and
you can mask any inaccurate ones.
Some levels have adjustable spirit tubes. To make these
accurate, draw the two lines as above and then adjust
the bubble into the reticles on a line that bisects the
angle formed by the original lines.
Use a straightedge to measure the heights of the mold
frames during set-up. It can be quite light, but it should
not be easily bent. In most cases, 11⁄2"  1⁄2" (38mm 
12mm) stock is adequate. The straightedge must be
long enough to reach from the highest point in the 
set-up to the centering cable. A little excess length is
desirable, but more than an extra 1⁄4" (6mm) or 
so—however much the cable clears the floor or 
strongback —gets in the way as you work.
To set up the heights of the mold frames, you need the
waterlines on the mold frames and the centering cable
on the foundation as reference points. Take all of these
points off the lofting body plan. If you have not drawn
the cable location on the lofting floor, do so now. Place
the straightedge along the centerline of the body plan
and mark it for the cable location and the waterlines.
Because all of the mold frames may not have the same
waterline as a reference point, you need to mark the
straightedge with all the waterlines that come into play.
To set up the first station, clamp the straightedge 1⁄8"
(3mm) to the side of and parallel to the centerline of
the mold frame face. Then adjust the straightedge up
and down until the appropriate waterline mark on the
straightedge is aligned with the reference waterline on
the frame.
Spring clamps are handy and effective for holding the
straightedge to the frame. Apply the clamps at the
vertex of the frame and at the spall. If the straightedge
is put on the control face, you will have to put a shim
of scrap mold frame material between the straightedge
and the spall as a spacer to hold the straightedge
parallel to the control surface. If the straightedge is put
on the opposing non-control surface, you will need a
shim of scrap spall material to fill a space between the
straightedge and the vertex so that the straightedge is
parallel with the controlling edge.
In Chapter 17 we suggested that you install the spalls
so that their edges are the reference waterline. If this
has been done, recheck the edges for straightness. An
alternative to using the edge of the spall is to stretch 
a string, held by spring clamps, across the waterline
marks on the frame and to adjust the straightedge 
mark to the string.
Putting up the Frames
In constructing the frames, you have already cut the
legs to a uniform height or marked this distance. When
you set up the frames, the cable and its corresponding
mark on the straightedge will be very close to the same
height as soon as the mold station is set into position.
202
First Production Steps

--- PAGE 217 ---
Place the station so that the straightedge is next to the
cable but not touching it. Put clamps over the legs and
anchoring blocks and tighten them at least enough to
keep the frame from falling over. Screw type C-clamps
are more satisfactory than sliding, quick-action clamps
because they do not fall off when you make adjust-
ments. Put a temporary diagonal brace in with clamps
as you plumb the station fore and aft with the spirit
level. You can loosen the clamps on the legs enough to
allow the legs to slip on the anchoring blocks while
adjustments are made.
To position the stations, you can use either a plumb
bob or the two-level method. As mentioned earlier, the
plumb bob ensures greater accuracy. To use the plumb
bob, attach it at the station vertex on the centerline with
a spring clamp and enough string so that the point of
the bob barely clears the centering cable. Place the bob
on the opposite side of the station from the straightedge
so they are not in the way of each other.
Next adjust the position of the station until the
following conditions simultaneously exist:
1. The plumb line is over the centerline of the frame,
with the point of the bob over the centering cable;
2. The frame is plumb fore and aft and free of twist;
that is, the frame is exactly perpendicular to the
centering cable;
3. The cable mark on the straightedge is level with the
cable.
Chapter 18 – Setting Up
203
Figure 18-5  Two views of a typical frame set.
Figure 18-4 Setting up the first frame.
Notches for keel and stringers
All reference lines should be marked on
both sides and edge of mold.
Plumb line may be
used to center mold
instead of straight-
edge
Light
straightedge
clamped on 
mold centerline
and set at refer-
ence waterline
for adjusting
and centering
Shim
Waterline marks
for reference
leg (joined edge
fastened to control
face of mold)
2" X 4" 
Brace or jigging
lumber – bonded
and fastened
Mold beveled on
this side
Control edge or face
goes on station line
Spall
Cleat on
station line
Wedges
Centering cable
Floor
Wedges for height adjustment
Spall
Cleat
Centering cable

--- PAGE 218 ---
To detect twist, hold the spirit level in a vertical position
in various locations on the station face. If you have
applied the legs precisely parallel to the centerline, you
can use the legs as the arbitrarily chosen points to be
made plumb. To eliminate twist, you usually need to
adjust the diagonal or to install a second, and some-
times even a third, diagonal.
If the set-up is on a floor, you can use wooden wedges,
tapped under the legs with a mallet or manually, for
minute increments of vertical adjustment. If the set-up
is on a strongback, you can make these adjustments in
the clamping of the legs to the anchoring blocks. Vertical
adjustment usually necessitates adjustment of the
diagonal(s) to bring the station back to plumb and the
taking up or letting out of line to the plumb bob. Keep
working until the station position is accurate. One
adjustment may necessitate others.
If you are using the two-level method instead of a plumb
bob, you will need a second spirit level. Clamp this
horizontally along the spall. The straightness of the spall
edge is obviously very important. With the two-level
method, bringing the bubble of the second level into the
reticles takes the place of bringing the plumb line over
the station’s centerline. Bringing the straightedge to the
cable then performs the function of aligning the center-
line onto the cable. The other level is used as before.
Orient the level that is clamped to the spall in the same
direction on all the frames. In other words, if the frames
are being set up in a north-south direction athwartship,
mark one end of the level “N” or “S” and always
position it accordingly. In this way, any error in the
level will always be in the same direction and the result
will be that all of the station centerlines, though they
may not be perfectly vertical, will at least be in the
same plane, which is all that really matters.
Before applying any filleting, it is a good idea to go to
the lofting floor and measure and make notes on the
distances for each station of the cable to sheer and the
cable to the top of the mold frame. After a station is in
position, check the measurements in the set-up before
applying the filleting. The check is good for revealing
any gross errors in manufacturing or setting up the
frame. Such errors would reveal themselves rather soon
in any case, but it is better to discover them before it
becomes necessary to chisel away the filleting material
in order to correct them.
When you are sure that the station is in perfect align-
ment, you can fillet the legs to the anchoring blocks
and the floor. Use a high-density filler/epoxy mixture
that is roughly the consistency of peanut butter. The
strength and holding power of this mixture is adequate
to support the legs throughout hull construction if you
make generous fillets along all the lines where the legs
and the block meet. There is no need to put adhesive
between the surfaces or to otherwise support the legs if
the fillets are formed on clean, oil-free surfaces.
Nailing and Screwing Legs
If you have plenty of clamps, you can just fillet around
them and leave them in place until the filleting material
cures. This allows you to proceed immediately to the
next station. You can patch in the remainder of the fillet
later, after the clamps are removed.
If you don’t have enough clamps to go on to the next
station, you can use nails and/or screws driven through
the legs to the anchoring blocks to hold the frame in
position while the filleting cures. Drive the nails and
204
First Production Steps
Figure 18-6 A frame set-up showing the straightedge, a
string on the reference waterline, and levels.

--- PAGE 219 ---
screws while the clamps are on. After you remove the
clamps, recheck the position of the station. Nails and
screws can allow small amounts of movement. Therefore,
do not rely on nails and screws as a permanent measure
to prevent movement. You should always apply fillets, if
only because they show telltale signs of movement so
slight that they otherwise might go unnoticed.
Permanent Bracing
The temporary diagonals, which are only clamped until
the filleting material on the legs cures, must be replaced
by permanent diagonals. Some thought must go into
location of the permanent diagonals, especially if you
are placing some bulkheads in the set-up. Bracing will
have to be kept out of their way.
If it is necessary to release the temporary diagonals
before you apply the permanent ones, you will have to
replumb the station, fore and aft, and recorrect twist.
Handle both of these operations as before by holding a
spirit level vertically on the face of the mold frame.
Since the legs will have been permanently secured by
this time, you need not worry about any other aspect of
the station positioning. When everything is aligned,
fillet the permanent diagonals in place.
When all of the frames are set up, we usually place a
batten in various positions across the frames to see how
the whole thing fairs. Since the frames will not have
been beveled at this time, this fairing check will be crude,
but it will nonetheless reveal any sizable mislocations.
Should a frame appear to be out of place, check its
position, as well as those of the frames on either side 
of it, by measurements from the lofting. Be sure you
know exactly where an error is before changing things.
Warping or curling of mold frame material will cause an
appearance of error, especially toward the ends of the
set-up. If the long batten shows a discrepancy, check 
for warp or curl in the stations, as well as for station
position.
Chapter 18 – Setting Up
205
Figure 18-7 A straightedge clamped at centerline of frame.
Figure 18-8  Setting up frames. Note the wedges on the floor
under the legs. The frame in the foreground is clamped to its
anchoring block and the diagonal bracing. A straightedge is
clamped along the frame’s centerline and just touches the
centerline cable at floor level.

--- PAGE 220 ---
Beveling
Frames are beveled so that planking can bend evenly,
with smooth curves, over them. Begin this operation by
rolling flat black paint on the edges of the frames. Most
of this paint will be planed away; the object is to leave 
a thin line of black on the controlling edge so that you
know it has not been disturbed.
Use a batten that spans at least three stations as a guide
for beveling. Lay it over three frames and nail down its
ends. If your mold frames are only 1⁄4" (6mm) thick,
you can just hack away excess stock from the middle
frame. If they are thicker, take a handsaw and cut
marks on the edge of the middle frame on either side of
the batten parallel to it as it crosses the frame edge at an
angle. Cut no deeper than the black control edge. Move
the batten up and down the frame, sawing or hacking
every foot along its edge. Check for fairness. When you
have finished one frame, move on to the next.
When all larger frames are marked, chisel away the
wood between the kerfs so that you have a series of
notches. Check again for fairness, and then scribble
across the bottom of each notch with a pencil. Using
the pencil marks to guide you, plane the entire edge of
the frame. We use power planes to rough-cut bevels,
but advise against them unless you have some experi-
ence with these machines. Hand planes do just as well,
though at a somewhat slower rate.
Fairing
Once you have rough cut the bevels so that only a thin
line of black remains on the controlling edges, you are
ready for final fairing. As in lofting, the eye and artistic
sensitivity are the main tools. The object is to make the
long batten touch all the controlling edges under it and
form a curve free of lumps or flat spots in all positions
on the length of the set-up.
To accomplish this, it may be necessary to cut below
the marked black control edge in some areas, and to
build up above the edge in others by bonding on strips
of wood or not beveling to the full depth of the saw
cuts. Accurate work in lofting, picking up, cutting
frames, constructing them, and setting them up will
hold errors that have to be corrected in this manner to
a minimum. Minute errors in each of these operations
are practically unavoidable, but for the most part they
cancel each other out. In some areas, though, the errors
will all add up to something that has to be corrected.
In final fairing, the batten tacked across the mold
frames sometimes looks wrong or irregular because of
the way in which it is positioned. Do not undertake any
corrections on the basis of a single batten position.
Move the batten all about the set-up, and make an
overall analysis of what has to be done. Carefully mark
errors on the frames in the exact area where you
observe them. As you place the batten in various
positions (this is especially a problem in areas of diffi-
cult curves), the error in one area may read differently,
creating some confusion, and you have to make a
judgment between conflicting dimensions as to which
one is the real error. Sometimes a compromise between
measurements results in the best fairness.
When you are certain what corrections are needed,
make them by planing below the marked control edge
or bonding on shims. Work until the set-up is fair,
without any humps or flat spots.
206
First Production Steps
Figure 18-9 Beveling mold frames.
Use a batten and saw
to get rough bevels
Batten
Molds
Chisel out stock
between kerfs
Dress lightly with
plane to obtain 
clean fair 
surface
Chisel to
marks

--- PAGE 221 ---
This chapter discusses keel and stem construction, and includes information on keelsons, centerboard and
daggerboard cases, and laminated sheer clamps. It contains only minor changes from earlier editions. 
In traditional construction, the keel is the backbone or
major structural element of a boat. It’s usually large and
strong, and ribs and frames are attached to it to form
the skeletal framework over which planking is laid.
In the composite construction methods we use, however,
the integrity of the hull structure is less dependent on
the keel. Loads are distributed so efficiently throughout
the boat that keels are sometimes almost unnecessary.
The stem, a second critical element in older designs,
has lost its importance to a lesser extent. Strong stems
protect hulls when they strike objects at sea, so we
continue to use them to minimize damage.
In addition to describing keel and stem construction,
this chapter discusses keelsons, centerboard and
daggerboard cases, and sheer clamps. With the
methods for laminating hulls detailed in later chapters
of this book, we plan these components and some
interior features before planking.
The Keel/Stem Assembly
The keel, which serves as a natural joining point for the
planking on either side of it, is often the key to making
modern construction methods practical. A keel also
contributes to overall hull strength by distributing high
point loading over large areas of skin. This function
may be more valuable out of the water than in it: when
a boat is hauled, a strong keel may help to support its
entire weight at several points.
The size and shape of both the keel and the stem vary
widely from boat to boat and depend on structural
needs and construction techniques. We usually build
the two parts separately, join them with a scarf joint to
form a keel/stem assembly, and then install the unit in
the set-up. A boat with very gentle curve in the stem
could conceivably have a stem and keel made in one
lamination, but we have never found this to be practical.
We make them up separately because keels generally
have only gentle curves, which can be formed with a
few layers of wood, and stems often have at least one
severe curve, which requires many laminations.
Laminating a single keel/stem unit with many layers to
accommodate the curve in one area of the stem would
waste time and material. Most boats have transoms, so
stems are only required at the bow. A double-ender will
need stems at both ends of the keel, however, and in
this situation a three-piece keel/stem complex may be
necessary.
If the keel and stem are to be anywhere near as strong
as the hull skin, special attention must be paid to their
construction. The keel/stem unit usually joins the two
halves of the hull skin and while it is unlikely that this
joint will be as strong as the skin, high grain strength is
needed to prevent splitting along the boat’s centerline.
Keels that are less than 1" (25mm) thick can be built of
solid lumber, but we prefer to laminate both keels and
stems, following procedures described in Chapter 11,
because of the structural advantages of the laminate.
There are several ways to prevent splitting at the keel.
Carbon or glass fibers may be bonded between layers of
planking where they meet. We usually add plywood
strips to our keels. On keels less than 1" thick, we begin
with solid lumber, and then bond plywood to what will
be its interior surface in the boat, as in Figure 19-1,
Section B. In large, thick keels, it’s wiser to distribute
thin layers of plywood through the lamination than to
rely on a single strip of heavier ply. Birch plywood is
particularly effective in this application because it is
strong in tension and it bonds well with epoxy. Three-
ply 1⁄8" (3mm) thick plywood is adequate in most cases.
In traditional designs, stems and keels are usually
rabbeted, notched to accept planking and allow it to lie
flush with the outside of the keel or stem. Rabbeting is
time-consuming, and it requires skill and patience. To
Keels, Stems, and Sheer Clamps
C H A P T E R
19

--- PAGE 222 ---
gain more bonding area, we have eliminated it. Instead
of rabbeting, we laminate the keel and stem and then
shape them to accept the planking, which generally
covers the entire keel and most of the stem. The
planking is eventually covered with a laminated
hardwood cap, illustrated in Figure 19-1. The cap
becomes an extension of the keel and performs the
functions of a rabbeted keel. Our technique is fast,
accurate, and potentially less wasteful of materials, and
it produces a joint which is structurally superior to a
rabbeted joint.
Planning the Keel/Stem Lay-Up
A good deal of thought must go into planning the
keel/stem complex. Determine the finished size of the
lamination so that you can laminate together enough
stock to form a blank from which to cut, shape, and
fair the final piece. Keel laminations can become
complex because they may have different widths and
thicknesses along their lengths, depending on the hull
shape and the requirements for bonding surface area.
Some keels will be very simple, and their entire length
can be made out of one size of stock. Other keels may
be considerably wider in the middle than they are at
the ends, or much thicker at some points than others.
Stems also may be much wider at the deck intersection
than they are at the waterline.
To develop all of these dimensions, you need to go to
the lofting board and develop the keel shape at each
station. If the designer does not specify an exact keel
size, begin by drawing the section view of the keel into
several stations on the body plan. The basis on which
we develop keel shape and/or size is surface bonding
area. Wider keels develop more bonding surface and
208
First Production Steps
Figure 19-1  Three section views through the stem and keel of the 60' (18m) trimaran Rogue Wave. Note the plywood laminated
into the main keel. The cross-grain in this lamination counteracts the splitting forces of the keel or centerboard.
Section A 
(through stem)
Stem – thin
laminations of
mahogany
Planking
A
Plywood
Cap – thin laminations
that can be bent
around stem profile
easily
Planking
Mahogany cap –
covers end grain
Mahogany keel
Plywood gusset
Plywood frame
Plywood
Section C
keel
C
Thin laminations
of stem
Cap
Frames
B
Mahogany keel
Section B
(through forefoot at scarf)

--- PAGE 223 ---
therefore are usually more desirable, but they usually
have to get thicker to get wider. When trying to develop
sufficient bonding area at various station positions, you
will find that the flatter areas in the middle of the hull
permit the use of a thinner keel section, while the finer
bow area will require a much thicker keel section to
provide the same bonding area. Stems may have to be
two or three times thicker than keels because the sharp-
ness with which the planking joins the hull at the stem
limits bondable area.
When you have developed the keel shape at a few
stations, you can loft and fair the keel at all of the
stations on the lofting board. It is important to
remember that you need to subtract the cap thickness
from the outside lofted profile of the hull in order to
define the keel and stem profile. The stem is sometimes
difficult to project properly in the lofting. See Chapter
16 for a detailed discussion of this procedure. Chapter
16 also gives instructions for the development of all
stem dimensions.
Also lay out the area, usually near the forefoot, where
the keel and stem meet. A 10- or 12-to-1 scarf bevel is
needed for adequate strength, so the joint may be quite
long. Because its two parts may curve slightly, a
keel/stem scarf joint can be difficult to manufacture.
There are no hard and fast rules about the direction—
stem over keel or keel over stem—the scarf should run.
After lofting the stem and keel, locate the scarf. Then
draw in the bearding line, which shows the inside
intersection of the planking and the stem or keel. Make
a pattern or template of the area where the stem and
forward end of the keel join. The easiest way to do this
is to use the nail method of transferring lines described
in Chapter 17. It’s best to pick up all pertinent profile,
sheer, scarf, station, and bearding lines at the same
time. Check all measurements and label all lines clearly.
Cut out the template and carefully trim it to the profile
shape on the lofting.
If you are planning to build your boat using the mold
method for laminating hulls, the process of installing 
a permanent stem in your mold may involve a few 
extra steps. An inner mold stem may be necessary. Loft
and shape this piece before you begin work on your
keel/stem unit, following instruc