poxy will no longer chemically link
to it, so the surface of the epoxy must be properly
prepared and sanded before recoating to achieve a
good mechanical, secondary bond. The mixture will
continue to cure for the next several days to two
weeks at room temperature, becoming an inert plastic
solid.
When resin and hardener are mixed in proper propor-
tions, epoxy will usually gel, or begin to harden, in
32
Fundamentals of Wood/Epoxy Composite Boatbuilding
Consistency
Unthickened mixture
Slightly thickened
Moderately thickened
Maximum thickness
Syrup
Catsup
Mayonnaise
Peanut Butter
General
Appearance
Characteristics
Drips off vertical
Sags down vertical
Clings to vertical
Clings to vertical
surfaces.
surfaces.
surfaces-peaks
surfaces-peaks
fall over.
stand up.
Uses
Coating, “wetting-out”
Laminating/bonding
General bonding,
Gap filling, filleting,
before bonding, applying
flat panels with
filleting, hardware
fairing, bonding
fiberglass, graphite
large surface areas, 
bonding.
uneven surfaces.
and other fabrics.
injecting with a syringe.
Figure 4-4 Epoxy can be thickened to the ideal consistency needed for a particular job. We refer to four commonly known
consistencies: syrup, catsup, mayonnaise, and peanut butter.
Figure 4-5 As it cures, epoxy passes from a liquid state, to a
gel state, to a solid state. Cure time is shorter when the epoxy
is warmer and longer when the epoxy is cooler.

--- PAGE 47 ---
from less than thirty minutes to about two hours
depending on the hardener selected and ambient
temperature. At this point, the epoxy is uncured. Some
operations, like trimming fiberglass joints, are best
undertaken when epoxy is partially cured, 3 to 8 hours
after application, depending on the temperature. At
this point, the epoxy is no longer liquid or rubbery
and not yet hard. It’s important that the cutting opera-
tion does not peel fiberglass away from the hull.
Although a residual reaction continues for up to two
weeks, we consider epoxy to be fully cured three or
four days after application, depending on ambient
temperature. Coatings of WEST SYSTEM epoxy should be
sufficiently cured for subsequent operations after 12 to
24 hours—usually overnight. If you run into an unpre-
dictable pot life which cannot be explained by ambient
temperature, test to make sure that your pumps are
correctly metering and dispensing resin and hardener.
Using WEST SYSTEM Epoxy
in Hot or Cold Conditions
Most questions about WEST SYSTEM epoxy come up after
people have not used it for a while and then use
it in different or in difficult conditions. Extremely hot
or cold weather can affect cure rates, and extreme
moisture, in the form of wet wood or high humidity
levels, has been known to cause other problems.
Epoxy’s sensitivity to heat becomes immediately appar-
ent when, after months of working in the cold, you first
mix epoxy on a hot day and find that it sets up much
more quickly than you expected. In warm tempera-
tures, reaction is faster, pot life is shorter, and cure-up
occurs more rapidly than in cold weather. In the same
way, if you are used to mixing epoxy in hot weather
and it turns colder, pot life will be longer and cure-up
time extended.
The temperature of the work place affects the speed
of the polymerization reaction. While the initial pace
of the reaction is set by the temperature of resin and
hardener, heat generated by the reaction accelerates
molecular cross-linking until the most active phase
of the reaction is complete. When resin and hardener
are cold, the reaction gets off to a slow start and may
not build up enough heat for thorough cross-linking.
On the other hand, the heat of warm epoxy speeds up
the chemical reaction. If cold epoxy is applied to cold
wood, or if warm epoxy is applied to warm wood, these
effects are magnified.
Cure rates are also determined by what happens to the
heat generated by the exothermic reaction. This in turn
depends on ambient temperature levels and the ratio
of mass to exposed surface area. A quantity of resin and
hardener mixed and left standing in a small diameter
mixing container will cure quickly in warm weather
because the energy produced cannot easily escape into
the atmosphere. It insulates itself and accelerates the
exothermic reaction. An equivalent amount of epoxy
in a roller pan will cure more slowly because its heat
dissipates through its increased surface area. Epoxy loses
less heat and cures faster in a bonding application with
little exposed area than it does in a thin film coating
with maximum exposed surface. In general, fillers
shorten pot life. The extra stirring needed to blend
additives and epoxy and the relatively smaller surface
area of thickened epoxy combine to add and retain heat.
For best results in hot weather, choose WEST SYSTEM
206 Slow Hardener or 209 Extra Slow Hardener for their
increased pot life. To prevent premature set-up, mix
small batches to keep heat production at a minimum and
quickly pour them into a roller pan to increase exposed
surface area. Store unmixed resin and hardener in a cool
place, or at least in the shade and out of direct sunlight.
Very cold weather can present greater problems. Resin
viscosity increases and metering with dispensing pumps
becomes almost impossible at very low temperatures.
Thick epoxy is hard to handle, and it may not adequately
penetrate wood for good adhesion. During slow cures,
coated surfaces may be contaminated, especially by mois-
ture and carbon dioxide, and become cloudy. Cold wood
substrate and frozen epoxy can add to difficulties.
Several measures may be taken to overcome these effects.
Use 205 Fast Hardener and store resin and hardener in
a warm place. Using a cylindrical container as a mixing
pot, stir the mixture longer than usual and allow heat to
build up for a few minutes before you pour the epoxy
into a roller pan. Think about using external heat sources
to bring materials up to good working temperatures.
If you have a heat gun, it is handy for warming both
epoxy and wood that will be bonded. There is no
Chapter 4 – WEST SYSTEM® Products
33

--- PAGE 48 ---
point in heating materials much over 100°F (38°C) since
excess heat can boil away portions of the epoxy formula-
tion, so we prefer 750°F (399°C) hot air guns to more
powerful models. Try to avoid blowing air into mixed
epoxy and warm it gently with adequate ventilation. If
the mixture foams, it has probably boiled and will no
longer be reliable. Heat guns can ignite combustible
materials, so be careful whenever you use them.
Heat lamps and regular light bulbs can be used locally
to raise the temperature of joints as they cure and to
warm containers of resin and hardener. When we want
a small part to cure, we often put it in a “hot box” with
a light bulb. Rigid sheets of foil-backed foam insulation
make cheap and easy warming compartments for
supplies and set-ups. Lamps present significantly fewer
fire risks than heat guns, but they should still be used
with caution.
If WEST SYSTEM resin is stored in very cold or freezing
temperatures, crystals may appear in the resin. If this
happens, boil a pot of water large enough to hold the
container, remove it from direct heat, and carefully put
the can of resin in the water bath. Remember to remove
the container’s lid to avoid the possibility of bursting
the can. Stir the warming epoxy well with a clean stick
until the liquid regains clarity and all crystals at the
bottom of the container are dissolved. Then replace the
lid and shake the resin well to melt any crystals which
might be clinging to the top of the container. If you
suspect that resin in your pump has crystallized, pump
warmed resin through it to remove the crystals.
34
Fundamentals of Wood/Epoxy Composite Boatbuilding

--- PAGE 49 ---
In Chapter 2, we discussed the shift from traditional wooden boatbuilding to wood/epoxy composite technology.
That shift to wood/epoxy composites significantly increased the number of ways in which to build a wooden
boat. Additionally, choices in materials have expanded greatly over the past thirty years since this book was
first published. It is now possible to build truly composite boats—employing wood, advanced fibers, and
synthetic cores. This variety in material choices has resulted in an equally broad set of choices in hull construc-
tion methods, blending and blurring traditional differences. As a builder today, you have so many options that
it can be daunting. 
We believe it is important to be grounded in the basics. Then you can make informed decisions on how and
why you would choose a specific construction method. This chapter provides a brief, general discussion of
various hull construction techniques. It has been significantly revised from earlier editions. 
We are passionate about building boats using wood, and there are many ways to build a wooden boat. A hull
may be constructed traditionally, with lapstrake or carvel planking. It may be laminated, with layers of wood
laid over a permanent integral structure or a temporary mold. Depending on its shape, a boat may be built
with sheet plywood. It may be built from a kit, and because of the variety of kits available, many people now
begin their boatbuilding experience this way. 
Many books have been written on traditional boat construction. Our focus is primarily on plywood, strip, and
veneer laminated hulls, which we discuss at length in Chapters 20-25. We also address issues on strip
construction using glass or advanced fiber reinforcements, a popular and successful method that has
come into its own since the first edition of this book.
In the process of shopping for a design, you also shop
for a boatbuilding method. Most designers specify
exactly how their boats are to be built, if not explicitly,
then in their detailed drawings. When you buy your
plans, you therefore choose your building technique.
For reasons outlined in Chapter 6, we caution against
substituting one method for another without consulting
your designer.
Laminated Hulls
Laminated veneer hulls are the type of construction
most associated with wood/epoxy composite technology.
A laminated hull is basically a piece of boat-shaped
plywood. Layers of veneer (or in some cases thin ply-
wood planks) are bonded together to form a monocoque
or partial monocoque structure, that is, one in which
the outer skin carries all or a major part of the stresses
to which the boat is subjected. This method of hull
construction is a distinct departure from traditional
boatbuilding technique. To use it successfully, you need
some understanding of both wood and engineering.
As we discussed in Chapter 3, wood is a unidirectional
or anisotropic material with exceptional resistance to
fatigue. (Isotropic materials exhibit the same values
when measured along all axes and are equal in every
direction; anisotropic materials do not.) Wood is strong
parallel to its grain, weak across it, so its fibers must be
carefully aligned to receive and transmit loads. When it
is correctly arranged, wood grain will maintain its
strength through millions of cycles of loads.
To maximize the strengths of wood, you must identify
the loads and load paths of the structure in which it is
used. Sometimes this is easy. For example, the loads
imposed on a mast are primarily in one direction, so
you can orient wood fiber along its length to achieve
adequate structural strength. Determining the loads on
a hull, however, is not so simple.
As they sail, boats are subjected to longitudinal,
athwartship, and diagonal stresses. For centuries,
boatbuilders have oriented wood fiber in alternating
directions to make structures capable of withstanding
Hull Construction Techniques—
An Overview
C H A P T E R
5

--- PAGE 50 ---
these various loads. Typically, this meant placing longi-
tudinal planking on lateral ribs or frames. In a laminated
hull, by contrast, wood fibers run in all directions. No
single piece of veneer must take an entire load in cross
grain; instead, different layers share it. Because the
laminated hull is better designed to receive stress, it
requires less framing support than a traditional boat.
Laminating thus allows use of unidirectional material
to build an isotropic monocoque. Unanticipated loading
is far less threatening when a structure has strength in
every direction. Wood is lighter than other materials, so
a wooden hull can be thicker, for the same weight, than
a hull built of other isotropic materials.
Hot and Cold Molding—
A Historical Perspective
Laminating techniques depend on adhesives. Over
the years, methods and technologies used to laminate
boat hulls have, at least in part, developed around the
specific requirements of glues. Different adhesives
require different amounts of clamping pressure and
different cure temperatures. Some require tight fits,
while others can span voids. These factors in particular
have determined the history of laminated hulls.
Early laminated hulls were made by hot molding, the
process by which most plywood is made today. This
technology developed rapidly during World War II
when steel was in short supply. Adhesives then avail-
able required heat—often in excess of 300°F (149°C),
hence the name hot molding—and, frequently, 75 psi
of pressure to bond properly. Laminating was compli-
cated because large autoclaves were needed to provide
these temperatures and pressures. Capital investment
for pressure vessels and molds was very high, so hot
molding remained strictly within the economic range
of “big business.”
For 10 to 15 years after the end of World War II, some
leftover hot molding equipment was used in production
runs of various sizes and types of boat hulls. Luders 16
and Thistle class sailboats and small Wolverine outboard-
powered runabouts are examples of hot molded
laminated hulls. Just as the autoclaves and tooling
were wearing out, the fiberglass boat industry came
into its own with lower production costs and a more
marketable, seemingly lower-maintenance product.
Hot molded hulls couldn’t compete against this combi-
nation, and soon the industry died out.
In the early 1950s, adhesives that required neither heat
nor pressure came onto the market. Hot molding
gradually gave way to cold molding. Cures could be
reached at room temperature with contact pressure, so
the expense of pressure vessels was eliminated. A
simple mold or form and staples were all that were
needed to hold laminated parts together as they cured.
Since a minimum number of tools and little capital
were necessary, small builders could practice the
laminating procedures that had been limited to large
enterprises.
While our hulls may be considered cold molded, we
prefer to think of them as laminated. Our methods are
a direct outgrowth of hot molding technology as it was
applied to both boats and aircraft during the World War
II period. WEST SYSTEM® Brand epoxy, our contribu-
tion to this string of developments, has no special
clamping or temperature requirements. Its gap-filling
capabilities are an advantage when clamping pressure
is limited, and, with this epoxy, careful fits are not of
paramount importance. Our wood/epoxy laminating
techniques can produce far better results and longer-
lived, lower-maintenance boats than were previously
possible.
At the Gougeon Brothers’ shop, we have used three
basic wood/epoxy composite hull laminating methods:
the mold method, the strip plank method, and the
stringer-frame method. The mold required for each
method varies in complexity and, within each method,
endless variations provide flexibility in different situa-
tions. Each method has advantages and disadvantages,
which are discussed briefly here. More detailed instruc-
tions on each hull laminating technique follow in later
chapters.
The Mold Method
The mold method for laminated veneer hulls was
popular in the early years of wood/epoxy composites
but is used infrequently now. It is most broadly used
now in building custom, one-off racing boats using
advanced composite materials. A mold or plug is a
form over which to laminate veneer or plywood to the
desired hull shape. It provides a solid base on which to
36
Fundamentals of Wood/Epoxy Composite Boatbuilding

--- PAGE 51 ---
exert the pressure necessary to hold layers together
until the epoxy has cured. Historically, this pressure was
usually supplied by staples, but techniques which rely
on a vacuum to secure layers have also become popular,
especially in production situations.
If you build a relatively strong mold, you have a firm
base on which to build. The biggest advantage of this is
reproducibility: you can make any number of identical
hulls from a single mold. The major disadvantage of the
mold method is that it is difficult to absorb the time
and materials required to build a mold when you only
want one hull. The larger the boat, the larger this
problem becomes unless you are able to find other
people willing to rent or purchase the mold to build
their own hulls. Another objection to the mold method,
particularly for bigger boats, is that there is no practical
way of installing interior frames, bulkheads, or stringers
in the set-up. You must build all of these structural
elements into the interior after you remove the mold
from the hull.
If you are considering the mold method for aesthetic
or weight-saving reasons, we recommend it for boats
under 25' (7.6m) that have hulls thick enough to
require little support from interior framework. Smaller
hulls, in general, are ideal for monocoque construction.
Chapter 5 – Hull Construction Techniques—An Overview
37
Figure 5-1 The 30' (9.1m), IOR 1⁄2-ton racer Accolade is the
largest boat we have built using the mold method.
Figure 5-2 A beautiful dinghy built by Steven Loutrel using
the mold method.
Figure 5-3 A molded dinghy built by Peter Unger. This size
and style are ideally suited to the mold method.

--- PAGE 52 ---
Small dinghies, for example, are lightest when built
with the mold method, so it is often used for day sailing
dinghies and small offshore boats. Although the mold
method can theoretically be used on any size hull—
the largest mold we ever built was for a 30' (9.1m)
boat—quicker, more efficient, and more cost-effective
methods are available for large boats.
The Strip Plank/Veneer Method
for Larger Boats
Because of the expense of the mold and the labor
needed to install interior members, it’s often hard to
justify the use of the mold method on larger one-off
hulls. To get around these extra costs, some builders
use the mold as part of the hull. Many molds are strip
planked anyway; with the strip plank/veneer method,
the planking becomes part of the structure itself and
does not remain part of the mold. Strip planking is
efficient and economical for many boats, but it is
especially suitable for bigger custom boats.
While hulls have been planked with edge-glued strips of
wood for many years, larger strip planked boats rely on
intricate interior framework for athwartship strength and
stiffness. The alternative to interior support, sheathing
the planking with fiberglass cloth as is done with stripper
canoes, does not provide enough strength for very large
hulls. We discovered, however, that we can build an
exceptionally rigid and strong monocoque by using the
basic strip planked hull as a form over which to laminate
diagonal layers of veneer. The layers of exterior veneer
eliminate or reduce much of the interior framework
associated with larger wooden boats 
With the strip plank method, it is advantageous to
install many major bulkheads in the boat during the
set-up and to form the hull right around them. This
saves time later because it is usually much easier to
install bulkheads before planking than to tediously fit
them in a finished hull. In a large, one-off project,
including internal structure in the set-up can signifi-
cantly reduce labor. Too many interior members may,
however, get in the way of sanding interior planking.
Strip planked hulls have thick, load-bearing wooden
skins. They are reasonably light with high strength and
stiffness-to-weight ratios. As a bonus, the thickness of
a strip planked hull provides excellent insulation from
noise and temperature, and it may also reduce conden-
sation problems. Practical considerations generally limit
the use of the strip plank/veneer method to boats of
perhaps 30' (9m) or more, although some heavier
displacement, shorter, oceangoing cruisers have been
built with this technique.
Hull thickness is in fact a major consideration in
successful use of the strip plank method. The mold
must be stiff enough to support layers of laminated
veneer, so at least 1⁄2" (12mm) planking is usually used
on larger boats. For support with minimal interior
framing, we recommend that this be covered with no
less than three layers of 1⁄8" (3mm) veneer. The resulting
7⁄8" (22mm) hull will weigh a bit over 2 pounds per
square foot (.98kg/m2), and this may be too heavy for
smaller boats. While the edges of thicker planks can
be aligned with dowels or nails, thinner planking may be
stapled during edge gluing. No matter which is used,
the strip plank/veneer method is not particularly quick
when compared to other laminating techniques.
It should be noted that with a light, strong hull and
clean interior, this strip plank/veneer method of
construction has proven to be very successful in the
largest boats (Bruce King’s magnificent yachts are prime
examples). It is the preferred method for building larger
wood/epoxy composite boats to approval under Lloyd’s
or other certifying agencies.
38
Fundamentals of Wood/Epoxy Composite Boatbuilding
Figure 5-4 The 124' (37.7m), Bruce King designed, sloop
Antonisa was built by Hodgdon Yachts, Inc. using the strip
plank/veneer method. Hulls as large as 213' (65m) have
been built with this method.

--- PAGE 53 ---
Strip Composite Construction
for Smaller or Lightly Built Boats
As discussed above, strip planking with additional
layers of veneer providing cross-grain and torsional
strength has been very successful on larger wood/epoxy
composite boats, but it is not typically employed on
smaller or more lightly built boats. For these, the strip
composite (stripper) construction seen in so many canoes
can be quite effective, especially when combined with
advanced fiber reinforcements.
This type of construction—strip planking sandwiched
between layers of structural fabrics—enjoys simplicity
in hull construction and a clean finished interior. It can,
however, require time-consuming fitting and installation
of bulkheads and interior joinery depending on how
the inner structural skin is designed and installed. The
molds to build stripper hulls can be set up as female or
male depending on the size, type of boat, and builder
preference. It has been employed effectively in boats as
large as 50' (15m) and for a wide variety of hull forms.
The option of a natural wood finish on smaller boats
and relative ease of construction have made strip
composite construction the most popular building
method over the past ten years. 
The Stringer-Frame Method
From a historical perspective, the stringer-frame method
was probably the most popular of the hull laminating
methods. One advantage is it does not require a conven-
tional mold. Interior members such as bulkheads and
frames may be installed in the set-up. The biggest advan-
tage of the stringer-frame method, however, is that you
can use it successfully with just about any size boat from
a 10' (3m) pram to a 60' (18m) oceangoing racer.
One reason that the stringer-frame method was so widely
used by both amateur and professional boatbuilders
was that it was the quickest, least labor-intensive way
to laminate a one-off hull. This method still has the
potential to produce the best strength and stiffness-
to-weight ratio hulls, particularly in situations where
there is little compound curvature as in catamaran and
trimaran hulls.
The stringer-frame method does, however, have some
disadvantages. The most obvious of these is that you
have to begin laminating the hull skin with what, in
reality, is an inadequate mold: you will have a good,
solid molding surface only after you have applied two
layers of veneer or plywood. Because stringers are set
at 5" to 8" (125mm to 200mm) centers, great care,
skill, and work are necessary to be sure of good
molding as you apply the first two laminations. For
the beginner, therefore, this method has the highest
potential for error of the three types of laminated hull
construction.
Chapter 5 – Hull Construction Techniques—An Overview
39
Figure 5-5  The 42' (12.8m), Ron Holland designed, IOR 2-
ton racer Golden Dazy was built by Gougeon Brothers using
the strip plank/veneer method.

--- PAGE 54 ---
Another shortcoming of the stringer-frame method is
that it results in a cluttered interior. Both mold method
and strip plank hulls have smooth, uncluttered walls,
but the stringers and frames, which are part of the
stringer-frame method, take up valuable interior room
and are difficult to keep clean. This kind of interior
may also be less pleasing to the eye.
The idea of load-bearing skins supported by stringer-
frame systems was first applied to aircraft in the 1930s
when designers found that they could greatly improve
strength-to-weight ratios by substituting wood panels for
fabric skins. The load-bearing skins became significant
in the development of modern aircraft design. The
marine industry borrowed the concept and, with a few
modifications, used it to build lightweight hull and
deck systems. Boats require somewhat thicker skins
than planes, but they are not as limited by weight.
Stringer-frame hull skins are much less thick than
mold method or strip plank hull skins. While the
other methods produce monocoque structures with
totally self-supporting, load-bearing skins, stringer-
frame hulls are partial monocoques, able to bear
loads only when held in proper position and column
by supporting framework.
A true monocoque skin is most effective in areas with a
great deal of compound curve—an eggshell shape, for
example. A stringer-frame supported, partial monocoque
skin is most effective with surfaces that are either flat or
curved in only one direction. Most successful multihulls,
with their long, flat runs, have used the stringer-frame
concept to best advantage since it produces the strongest
and stiffest hulls for a given weight. Because monohulls
usually have significant compound curvature, they are
40
Fundamentals of Wood/Epoxy Composite Boatbuilding
Figure 5-6 The 32' (9.7m), 1⁄2-ton racer Hot Flash was built
using the stringer-frame method. This type of construction is
popular with racing boat designers and builders.
Figure 5-7 Looking forward in the main hull of the 60'
(18.2m) proa Slingshot. The stringer-frame method is easily
adapted to fairly sophisticated designs for boats of any size.

--- PAGE 55 ---
built very successfully with any of the three methods of
laminating, and the decision between methods depends
on the individual project.
Hard Chine and Developed
Plywood Construction
There is a lot of variety in hard chine and developed
plywood construction—from the simplest kit to fairly
sophisticated racing boats. These methods offer the
beginner as well as the experienced builder hull con-
struction options based on standard sheet materials.
A single chine, plywood-skinned boat hull is the
simplest and least expensive method of hull construc-
tion. However, plywood does not bend into compound
shapes easily, so only sections of cylindrical or cone
shapes are typical. This limits the shape of a hull, giving
it a somewhat slab-sided look. However, the speed with
which you can build a hull with plywood may be
enough of a trade-off to overcome the aesthetic issues. 
Developed plywood shapes have been used extensively
in powerboat design and construction. This technique
blends the straight-line elements of conical and cylin-
drical surfaces into fairly sophisticated shapes.
Traditional lapstrake construction in plywood works
well in small boats. Multi-chine plywood construction,
a modern variation, is used in small boat kits as well as
some larger multihull designs. Variations have been
employed in very large boats, essentially interpreting
aluminum or steel designs in wood.
Composite chine construction, also known as stitch-
and-glue construction, is now very popular in kits. It
reduces or eliminates many of the internal structural
members made of wood (keels, battens, and chines) by
substituting built-up fillets of glass cloth and thickened
epoxy to connect and carry the loads between adjacent
plywood panels. Using this method, you can build
a complete hull quickly, without the need for mold
stations or a strongback. While typically used in kits,
composite chine construction has also been used in
some larger hulls. See Chapters 24 and 25 for more
complete information. 
Compounded Plywood Construction
Compounded plywood construction is fairly specialized
and typically found in one-off multihulls or in combina-
tion with developed plywood designs discussed above.
Plywood does not like to be forced into compound
shapes, but can be fooled into this if the builder is clever.
Compounded plywood construction depends on fairly
thin, high-quality plywood and is usually limited to very
modest amounts of compounding. Double-ended hulls
are possible, but transom hulls are preferred where the
builder is attempting a fuller hull design. Chapter 25 can
serve as a primer for the builder new to this construc-
tion method, but in all cases we recommend building
models of the proposed hull before committing time and
materials to a full-sized compounded plywood hull.
Later chapters deal in greater detail with laminating
procedures and these construction methods. In many
cases, the experienced builder will employ hybrid con-
struction techniques or blend features of more than one
method in building various parts of the boat. However,
as we warned above, the first time builder should con-
sider the designer’s intent before mixing or changing
the construction method spelled out in the plans.
Appendix D gives the scantlings for some hulls that have
been successfully laminated with wood and WEST
SYSTEM epoxy. These may serve as a guide for scant-
lings for each hull laminating method and may be
useful for comparison with your project.
Chapter 5 – Hull Construction Techniques—An Overview
41
Figure 5-8 The 35' (10.6 m) trimaran Ollie under construction.
Ollie’s main hull was built using the compounded plywood
method.

--- PAGE 56 ---
42
Fundamentals of Wood/Epoxy Composite Boatbuilding

--- PAGE 57 ---
Getting Started
Chapter 6
Before You Build
Chapter 7
Estimating Materials and Labor 
Chapter 8
Tools and the Boatshop
Chapter 9
Buying Wood
Chapter 10
Safety

--- PAGE 59 ---
Before You Build
C H A P T E R
6
As you read this chapter, pay careful attention to the comments about the time commitment required to build
a boat. Labor is easily underestimated, especially by someone who has never built a boat before. The advice
given in this chapter is as valid in 2005 as it was in 1985.
There are many reasons to build your own boat. You
may enjoy the process and regard boatbuilding as a
source of challenge and pride. The boat you want may
not be available in the marketplace. You may feel that
you cannot find the quality of workmanship you are
looking for unless you build your own. If you are like
many people, you want to build your own boat to save
money.
To enjoy any of these advantages and savings, you must
plan carefully and have realistic expectations of what
your project will entail. Builders who start their boats
with no firm idea of the time, money and difficulty
involved are often forced to abandon their work. You
do not want to be one of them.
Chapter 7 presents guidelines for estimating how much
you will spend on materials and hardware and for
calculating the time it will take you to finish your
project. It assumes not only that you have decided to
build, but also that you have a specific design in mind.
In this chapter, we will discuss factors that we think
you should consider before committing yourself to a
boatbuilding venture. If you have never built a boat
before, this may help you to decide if you have the
resources to finish one.
Our goal is not to discourage would-be boatbuilders.
In fact, we hope that you will enjoy the process so
much that you will do it again and again. We’ve built
everything from plywood dinghies to 60' (18.2m)
trimarans, so we know how exciting it is to get started
on a new boat. It will be easier to maintain enthu-
siasm throughout your boatbuilding project if you
give it some serious thought before you build.
Should You Build Your Own Boat?
Before devoting significant resources to a project, fully
consider the arguments for and against building your
own boat. You will save some money. More importantly,
you will end up with exactly the boat, with exactly the
detail and workmanship, that you want. But in order to
achieve this, you will have to make a significant invest-
ment of time, energy, and patience.
Labor costs represent about 50% of the price of some
mass-produced boats and a considerably higher per-
centage of the cost of one-off hulls. If you build your
boat yourself, you will not pay for someone else’s work.
Unless you quit your job in order to take up boat con-
struction, you will save money on labor.
By building your own boat you will eliminate sales
costs. A boat priced at $10,000 in the showroom was
probably built for $8,000. The extra $2,000 goes for
shipping from the factory to the dealer, the dealer’s
overhead and profit, and the salesman’s commission.
You will not have to pay these markups.
While you will have to pay sales taxes on materials and
hardware, you can pare down your tax bill by building
for yourself. You will not owe sales tax on a price inflated
by commissions and overhead, and you will not pay
indirect taxes on labor.
If you plan to borrow money to finance a boat, you
may save a bit by building it yourself. You will pay less
interest because you will need less capital. If you can
delay ordering materials until you need them, you may
be able to pay for some as you go along and your loan
period may be shorter.
Over time, an owner-built boat will generally cost less
to service. Because you built the boat, your trouble-
shooting will be more effective. A boat is a collection
of components. Since you constructed or purchased
and installed each of these yourself, you will be able
to recognize malfunctions at an early stage. Since you
bought the original hardware and instruments, you will
know where to go for replacements and repairs. By the
end of your project, you should be capable of almost
any major hull repair.

--- PAGE 60 ---
46
Getting Started
Finally, should you ever sell a boat you have built, you
will be able to convert some of your investment into
cash. If you did your job quickly and well, you may
even recoup a minimal wage for your labor. Surveyors
judge boats on their merits. The prices they set are
determined, within certain limits, as much by the
condition and quality of workmanship as by who did
the building. A home-built boat will probably never be
worth as much as one built at a famous yard, but if
your standards of craftsmanship are high and materials
are good, you should be able to sell your boat for a
reasonable amount.
After imagining all that you will save by building your-
self, you must come back to earth. It is very easy to
bank imaginary money and draw from it, especially if
you have not set straightforward financial limits. Know
what you can spend. Do not make the mistake of
figuring that small changes in your original plans will
only cost a little and that because you are saving so
much by building, you can well afford them. A number
of tiny modifications can add up to financial overexten-
sion, which may put your boat in jeopardy.
If you build your own, you may get more boat for your
money. You will certainly have more freedom to choose
the design, however radical or traditional, you want.
Because manufacturers must rely on large sales volumes,
their designs are usually tailored to appeal to as many
buyers as possible. If you cannot afford to have a one-
off hull built and your ideas of the perfect hull shape
are out of the ordinary, you may have no alternative
except building for yourself.
The economics of mass production also affect boat
detail. Interior construction requires time and skill.
Manufacturers interested in maintaining competitive
prices tend to offer minimal accommodations with few
personalized conveniences. A home-built boat has a
better chance of having exactly the drawers, lockers,
and color scheme you want.
Although reputable manufacturers do not compromise
the safety of their boats, the boat you build may be
safer than one you buy. Your intimacy with your boat’s
design will give you a head start in knowing its safe
performance limits. Further, a wood and WEST SYSTEM®
Brand epoxy hull will probably be stronger for its
weight than an equivalent glass-reinforced plastic hull.
You will enjoy these advantages only if you have the
basic skills needed to build a boat. Wood/epoxy
composite construction techniques may be somewhat
easier than traditional boatbuilding methods, but
woodworking experience is necessary. Lofting is tricky
and will call on geometry you probably haven’t used
since high school. Read through the Lofting chapter
in this book to be sure that you are up to the task.
You can take a shortcut and buy plans that do not
require lofting, but your boat’s curves may not end
up as smooth as you want them.
To build a boat, you must be willing to give up a great
deal of time, including the hours you usually spend
sailing. Your weekends and evenings will be taken up
by the jobs of planning, purchasing, and building, so
your family must support your goal. If your spouse
and children join you in your project, you will share
the learning, frustration, pride, and satisfaction that
Figure 6-1 Rogue Wave, a 60' (18.2m) ocean-racing trimaran
designed by Dick Newick for Phil Weld. Boats this large are
beyond the limits of most home builders’ resources.

--- PAGE 61 ---
Chapter 6 – Before You Build
47
are part of every boatbuilding endeavor. Family coopera-
tion may even result in the boat being built more quickly.
Boatbuilding requires patience and perseverance. The
joys can be great, but so can the tedium and frustration.
No one likes to sand, but it must be done if your boat is
to be finished properly. You must be prepared to devote
long hours to hard and repetitive work.
If you plan to build your own boat, you must be willing
to accept the risk that accompanies any large personal
commitment. At some point in the future, due to factors
beyond your control, you may be forced to abandon
your project. This may cause some financial hardship: it
is extremely difficult to sell a half-finished hull. Worse,
though, are the psychological results of giving up some-
thing on which you have lavished time and effort.
If you have never built a boat before, try a small project
first. Practice on a dinghy will give you experience with
the materials and methods described in this book.
Mistakes on a small boat take less time to correct than
mistakes on a large one, and the exercise will help you
decide if you have the skill, time and dedication
required for a larger enterprise.
Choosing the Right Boat
Once you have decided to build your own boat, choose
the specific design carefully. Ask yourself some questions.
How will you use your boat? What can you afford?
Failure to carefully consider these factors can lead to
the selection of a boat that will not meet your needs.
With whom will you be sailing? Will you be taking day
or weekend cruises or do you plan longer trips? Take a
long-range view and balance it against the length of
time you will own your boat. Young families tend to
increase in size, but if your children are older, you may
soon need less space. While every boat has an absolute
load limit, this is not the number of people who will
actually be comfortable on board. As a rule, more
passengers can be taken for short outings, fewer for
overnights, and fewer still on weekend cruises.
Boats with long-term, live-aboard accommodations with
large fuel and water tanks are expensive to build and
maintain. Before investing in them, think about where
you will be cruising and how the boat should be fitted
out. Live-aboard amenities for shorter periods necessi-
tate more frequent port calls, but are much less costly.
Where will you be operating your boat? Look over a
chart of your cruising area and take prevailing water
and wind conditions into account. These should have
significant impact on your choice of design. If you will
be in shallow waters, think twice about a boat with
deep draft. Some boats perform better in light air than
others. You will need fewer instruments and a simpler
boat if you sail in sheltered waters within visual range
of navigational aids than if you go to open areas. Your
boat’s interior requirements will vary according to
whether you plan trips to places where provisions are
readily available.
Will you race your boat? If so, investigate racing in
your area. Many different rating rules are used to
fairly equate different types of sailing craft. These
rules usually favor certain designs, so if you want a
competitive edge, check local rules carefully.
Do you plan to put your boat on a trailer? Trailering
is often a lot of work and sometimes requires waiting
in line at launch ramps, but it cuts expenses and
expands cruising range. Consider transporting your
boat overland as you pick your design, remembering
that long, heavy boats are particularly difficult to haul
and launch.
How much can you afford to spend each year on the
cost of owning and operating your boat? Items such
as dockage, launch, and haul-out are hard to predict
because they vary from region to region. Maintenance,
insurance, repair, and equipment replacement expenses
will depend on the workmanship, quality of accessories,
and general condition of the boat. The combined costs
of owning a boat annually amount to from 3% to 5%
of the vessel’s showroom cost, plus engine fuel. If you
budget for 5% plus fuel, you will be able to build up
a reserve for major repairs. 
Boat Plans
Once you have clear ideas of the kind of boat you want
and how much money you have available, begin looking
at specific designs. We recommend that you seek out
reputable naval architects and boat designers. These
professionals understand the various loads that will be
placed on a vessel and know how to make sure that the
boat will withstand them. You can save some money by
designing your boat yourself, but we advise against this.

--- PAGE 62 ---
48
Getting Started
Designers’ fees are small compared to the total cost of
a boat. Doing without an experienced designer is a
gamble in which a lot of money is bet against very little.
Shop for plans with as much diligence as you would
shop for any other boatbuilding material. Designers
should be willing to offer advice. Talk with them or
write to them about the boats you are considering and
inquire about performance. Ask about the prices and
details of plans. If you plan to build with WEST SYSTEM
materials, inform your designer and make sure that the
construction details provided are applicable. If you
want a class racing boat, check to see if the class associ-
ation sells detailed plans.
You have a choice of four different kinds of drawings.
Custom plans, which run about 10% of total construc-
tion cost, are specifically drawn for one client’s exclusive
use. Semi-custom plans are based on one of a designer’s
stock hulls, but are modified for a single client. They sell
for about 4% of total construction cost. Stock plans cost
1⁄2% to 2% of total construction and have no guarantee
of exclusivity. Study plans are insufficiently detailed
for building, but do provide enough information for the
browsing shopper. Designers either lend these to poten-
tial customers or charge a very minimal fee.
Even within these different types, plans vary greatly in
the amount of detail they provide. Some describe and
illustrate every aspect of construction, include full-scale
templates for fabricating parts, and suggest specific
woods and hardware. Others assume that you already
know a good deal about boatbuilding techniques and
offer little more than a set of hull lines and a table of
offsets. Quality and price are not necessarily determined
by the amount of detail a set of drawings contains.
Blueprint-type illustrations showing the size and position
of every component are rarely included in plans. Instead,
your designer will probably either provide you with
a set of scantlings or refer you to Lloyd’s, Nevin’s, or
Herreshoff’s scantling rules for wooden yachts. These
prescribed dimensions are critical to the safe and efficient
operation of your boat. Your designer has determined
them by balancing specific loads against overall hull
weight, and so they are not readily interchangeable
between boats. If you have any questions about scant-
lings, or if you are considering altering them in any way,
ask for professional advice.
Overbuilding is one of the most common errors in
boatbuilding. Erring on the side of safety by using
overly heavy scantlings can be quite wasteful. If you
use 11⁄4" (32mm) decking where 11⁄16" (27mm) would be
more appropriate, you will pay for more wood than you
really need and end up with a boat which is heavier
than it should be. Added load will stress the rigging of
sailboats and increase fuel consumption of powerboats.
If a hull is heavier than its designer intended, it will
ride in the water below the waterline and its perform-
ance will suffer.
Just as different boats have different scantlings, the
different boatbuilding methods in this book may
require different scantlings systems. There is no easy
way to directly translate, for example, the scantlings
for a laminated hull to hard chine construction. If
you are inclined to switch from the method specified
in your plans, consult your designer. While we are
always willing to offer broad technical advice, we are
unable to provide scantlings for specific applications.
48
Getting Started
Figure 6-2 Ollie, a 35' (10.6m) trimaran designed and built by
Gougeon Brothers, Inc. 

--- PAGE 63 ---
Chapter 6 – Before You Build
49
Modifying Plans
for WEST SYSTEM Materials
We are often asked if our construction methods can be
used to build traditional boats. They can, but you must
make some changes. Most available plans for traditional
small craft were drawn many years before the develop-
ment of modern resins. They rely on traditional building
techniques: a typical design might indicate carvel plank-
ing over closely-spaced ribs, a large rabbeted keel and
stem, and copper nails or bronze screws. This sort of
construction is not compatible with our methods and,
unfortunately, any attempt to blend old and new will
probably result in an unsuccessful hybrid.
The solution is to maintain all of the traditional lines,
but to alter the scantlings so that one of the building
methods described in this book may be used. We recom-
mend that this, like any other changes in scantlings, be
done under the supervision of an experienced designer.
Good plans for modern hull designs are readily avail-
able, but their construction often calls for building
materials such as fiberglass, steel, and ferrocement.
When designers choose these materials, it’s frequently
because they have little knowledge of or preference for
wood. It follows, then, that they may not be able to
help you very much if you want to convert their plans
to wood and WEST SYSTEM epoxy. We suggest that you
continue your search for a design if you find yourself
contemplating major changes in materials.
Many excellent boat designers are familiar with our
construction methods and offer plans for wood/epoxy
hulls. We will be happy to refer you to the professionals
who might be best able to advise you about the partic-
ular boat you wish to build.
Figure 6-3 Popular and competitively raced worldwide, the DN
class iceboat is a good project for beginners.

--- PAGE 64 ---
50
Getting Started

--- PAGE 65 ---
Certainly the material costs given in this chapter have changed since 1985, but the logic and calculations
used to estimate the total cost of your project remain sound. Please take the time to research and substitute
current material prices to arrive at an estimated cost for your proposed building project. As this chapter points
out, much of the expense of building a boat comes at the end of the project when the mechanical installations
occur. The exercises in this chapter are designed to help you stay within your means.
Realistic projections of material costs and labor require-
ments greatly increase the odds that you will finish
your boat. If you are lucky, your designer has included
an estimate in the plans. If not, take the time to make
one yourself before you get started. While you can get
some idea of what a boat will cost by finding a similar
mass-produced model and dividing its price in half or
by two thirds, we recommend more reliable methods.
As you look over your plans, prepare a rough estimate
based on the price per pound of the materials your boat
will require. If this figure seems affordable and you’ve
decided on your design, move on to a more detailed
estimate. Calculate your hull costs according to its
surface area, and add up the prices of hardware and
miscellaneous items. Make realistic guesses about the
amount of time you’ll spend on each step of construc-
tion. Consider all of these expenses before committing
yourself to the project.
Revise your estimate when you loft the boat. As you lay
out your lines, build the boat in your head to double-
check the accuracy of your numbers.
Rough Estimates
We divide the beginning estimate into two parts: bare
hull costs and hardware costs. From these, you’ll get a
rough indication of how much you’ll spend to finish
your boat, not including labor.
For a rough estimate of the bare hull cost, you need a
list of the materials used in your hull and deck and a
firm idea of your boat’s weight. This information should
be included in your plans. If it isn’t, ask your designer.
First, work out the proportion of each building element
to the entire weight of the hull. If, for example, you’re
thinking about a design with bare hull weight of 5,000
pounds (2250kg), you might find that the materials
required are 1,000 pounds (453kg) each of Douglas
fir, Western red cedar, and mixed WEST SYSTEM® Brand
epoxy, and 2,000 pounds (907kg) of 1⁄4" (6mm) Okoume
plywood. Next, work out the per-pound price of each of
these materials. Although WEST SYSTEM epoxy is not sold
by the pound, it is easy to calculate. (See Figure 7-3.)
Lumber is sold by volume and its price is listed in
board feet. To compute its cost per pound, multiply
board foot price by 12 to establish cubic foot price.
Divide this by the weight of the wood per cubic foot.
In the case of the 5,000 pound hull, you might work
out a table similar to that in Figure 7-1. To spare
yourself expensive surprises, add a 20% waste factor
for the total.
While this breakdown may not be absolutely accurate,
a small error is unlikely to cause any great change in the
final per-pound cost. The price of a basic hull structure
will vary a great deal according to the materials used to
build it. For most boats, in 1985 prices, hull and deck
construction will run between $2.00 and $3.00 per
pound, although it may be more if you plan to use
sophisticated materials or exotic woods.
The second part of the rough estimate, hardware costs,
includes rigging, sails, engine, keel, interior fixtures,
and deck items. It cannot be figured on a weight basis.
For a very general idea of these expenses, multiply your
bare hull costs by three. Hardware costs for a perform-
ance racing boat might be as high as four times the bare
hull estimate, while simpler or smaller projects will
have hardware costs only double those of basic
materials.
Estimating Materials and Labor
C H A P T E R
7

--- PAGE 66 ---
Adding together bare hull and hardware estimates for
the 5,000 pound design, total material costs are:
Bare hull
$10,780
Hardware
$32,340
Total rough estimate $43,120
Detailed Estimates—Hull Costs
The beginning estimate is far from accurate, especially
for larger boats. To refine it, draw up a detailed list of
boatbuilding materials. Everything from keel to cabin
to spar should be included. Think through the stages of
construction, from buying the plans to commissioning
the vessel, to be sure that your list is complete.
The detailed estimate is broken into three parts: hull
costs, hardware costs, and labor. The first of these
consists primarily of wood and epoxy, while hardware
costs, as in the rough estimate, include manufactured
items such as engine and winches. You will find labor
requirements by far the most troublesome to predict.
To determine hull costs, consult your plans and write
down all the basic materials you’ll need. Designers
often specify lumber dimensions and quantities on their
drawings, listing, for example, twenty-four 4'  8'
(1200mm  2400mm) sheets of plywood, 420 board
feet of Douglas fir, and 690 board feet of Western red
cedar. If no such information appears on your plans,
scale off measurements yourself.
Once you have a list of hull materials, break it down
into five categories:
l. Hull skin, cabin, cockpit, deck, centerboard, and
rudder.
2. Hull framework, including stringers, frames, sheer
clamp, stem, bulkheads, floors, and centerboard case.
3. Interior items, from bunks and cabinets to shelves
and partitions.
4. WEST SYSTEM epoxy and additives for coating and
bonding.
5. Miscellaneous materials, such as paint, molds, cloth,
cores, epoxy application tools, staples, fasteners, and
sandpaper.
Hull skin material costs are based on the exact surface
area of the hull and deck. If this is not given in your
plans or is not available from the designer, derive it from
your drawings. Lay a string along the curves of your
body plan to measure the girth of each station. Add these
measurements for the total girth and divide this number
by the number of stations measured. To find the hull
area, multiply this figure by the length of your hull.
Before making the detailed estimate, it’s necessary to
know what building method you will be using—strip
plank, laminated veneer over a mold, stringer-frame,
hard chine plywood, or whatever. If you are laminating
your hull, you will need to know how many layers of
wood you will apply. For the purpose of a sample
estimate, we will assume that a hull with 300 square
feet of surface area will be built with four layers of 
1⁄8" (3mm) cedar veneer.
Hull framework costing is a bit trickier. To arrive at any
sort of accurate estimate, you must look over your list,
52
Getting Started
Figure 7-1 Sample 5,000 pound bare hull estimate (in 1985 prices).
Material
Price/board ft
Price/
Weight/
Price/
Pounds 
Price
or sheet
cubic ft
cubic ft
pound
needed
materials
Douglas fir
$175 X 12
=
$2100
–:
36 lbs
= .58
X
1000 lbs
=
$58300
Western red cedar
$250 X 12
=
$3000 –:
24 lbs
= $125
X
1000 lbs
=
$1,25000
1⁄4 inch Okoume plywood
$4800/sheet
–:
20 lbs/Sheet = $240
X
2000 lbs =
$4,80000
(4 x 8 sheet)
WEST SYSTEM epoxy
$235
X
1000 lbs
=
$2,35000
Sub Total Materials
$8,98300
+20% Waste
$1,79700
Bare Hull Materials
$10,78000

--- PAGE 67 ---
Chapter 7 – Estimating Materials and Labor
53
Figure 7-2 Sample detailed veneer estimate.
Hull Surface 
Price/
Price/
No.
Price
Material
Area
Sq Ft
Layer
Layers
Materials
1⁄8-Inch sliced cedar veneer
300 Sq Feet
X
.44
=
13200
X
4
=
$52800
Sub Total Veneer
$52800
+20% Waste
$10560
Total Veneer Cost
$63360
item by item. Be prepared to find that your local lumber-
yard does not carry exactly what you need. Use your
best judgment in deciding what base stock sizes are
most suitable to your applications. Try to work out the
most economical uses of materials, especially plywood,
but allow generous margins for waste. Some areas are
particularly difficult, so pay extra attention to them.
Few lumber dealers will be able to sell you a perfect 
21⁄2"  11⁄2" board, 25' long, for a sheer clamp. You may
choose, therefore, to buy two 1"  6" boards, each 
25' long, and laminate it from them. This will require
more lumber than you really need and result in some
waste. If you can’t find any 25' boards and decide to
scarf up shorter ones, order at least an extra few feet
of wood for the joint.
You may plan to use many layers of wood to laminate the
stem. The layers must be sawn from stock of adequate
size, but before actually bending them to your curves,
you won’t know the best thickness of each layer. As a
result, you won’t really know how much stock to buy.
Take an educated guess, remembering that a saw blade
removes about 1⁄8" (3mm) of wood with each cut. If
you will be using 1⁄8" (3mm) layers, you’ll have a 50%
waste factor. If you can bend 1⁄4" (6mm) laminating
stock, waste will be noticeably reduced.
Before lofting them, it’s very hard to know how many
frames can be cut from a sheet of plywood. Given the
price of plywood, you don’t want to buy too much more
than you will need. To work around this difficulty, use
your imagination—and scraps of paper if necessary—to
come up with the most efficient use of material. Order a
little extra to be on the safe side.
Because of the unusually high waste rate in frame
construction, the costs of interior items are sometimes
difficult to predict. Lumber requirements are usually
not very critical, since you probably will have plenty
of short ends and scrap for cleats and framework.
Wood trim sizes and quantities are often indicated in
plans. Plywood, however, can pose some problems.
Look over your plans to identify which interior compo-
nents will be built with one or more sheets of plywood.
If, say, you plan six 30"  6' bunks and use a sheet for
each, you’ll have six leftover pieces which are not
particularly useful for anything else. Think of areas
where they might fit and consider scarfing them into
a larger piece. Ask yourself if any rounded partitions,
bulkheads, shelves, or bunks can be cut out of rectan-
gular stock. When you’ve finished this process, count
up the number of full sheets you’ll need.
All wood surfaces on your boat should be coated with
WEST SYSTEM epoxy. Plan to apply at least two
coatings—one initial saturation coat and one buildup
coat—to interiors and several more buildup coats to
exterior surfaces. Epoxy will be used as an adhesive
Application
Coverage ft2/lb
Coverage m2/kg
Waste Rate
Initial saturation coat
35 ft2/lb
7.1 m2/kg
20%
Secondary buildup coat
40 ft2/lb
8.2 m2/kg
20%
Interlaminate glue joint
13 ft2/lb
2.7 m2/kg
20%
Fiberglass saturation coat 12 oz/422 (400 g/m2)
12 ft2/lb
2.5 m2/kg
10%
Figure 7-3 Estimating WEST SYSTEM epoxy. A 105/205 or 206 Group B weighs 11 pounds. A 105/205 or 206 Group C weighs 50
pounds. Refer to the current WEST SYSTEM price list to calculate the cost per pound and per square foot. Contact the Gougeon
technical staff to estimate alternate hardeners and sizes.

--- PAGE 68 ---
between layers of laminated hulls and in joints and
fillets. See Chapters 11 through 15 for detailed discus-
sion of application techniques.
To estimate costs for WEST SYSTEM resin and hardener,
use your study of the hull framework and interior to
figure out the total interior surface area. Remember
to include frames, stringers, bulkheads, and cabinets.
Make educated guesses about the quantity of epoxy
you will need for joints. Refer to the hull surface area
to estimate your requirements for exterior laminating
applications.
WEST SYSTEM epoxy application rates vary according
to the kind of job and work habits. For estimating
purposes, see Figure 7-3. Plan on coating an average 
of 35 square feet with one mixed pound of resin and
hardener (7.1m2/kg) or 40 square feet per pound
(8.2m2/kg) for secondary coats. Rates for interlaminate
glue joints on hulls can be harder to predict because
they depend a great deal on the quality of the fit, the
quantities of filler, and the amount of clamping pressure
used. A good figure to use for hand lay-ups, with clamps
rather than vacuum pressure, is 13 square feet per
pound (2.7m2/kg) per glue line. If you have many small
jobs or if you will be working at cool temperatures,
coverage rates may be lower. On the other hand,
careful fitting of joints and good planning will improve
your application rate. Always add a 20% waste
allowance to your total estimate.
When you have established interior area, divide the
figure by 35 to find how many pounds of epoxy you’ll
need for the initial coat (divide by 40 for secondary
coats). Add the initial and buildup applications together,
and add a reasonable amount to cover your interior
joints and fillets.
Before estimating the hull’s exterior epoxy requirements,
count the saturation, buildup, and interlaminate glue
joints you will apply. When you have a firm idea of the
number of exterior coats, divide your entire hull surface
area by 35 for the initial coat and 40 for the buildup
coats. Add the pounds for all the coats to determine
total pounds of mixed epoxy needed. A laminated hull
requires at least one adhesive coating between each
layer of plywood or veneer in addition to its minimum
three exterior coatings. To find out how many pounds
you will need for these applications, divide the surface
area by 13 and multiply by number of interlaminate
glue lines.
Add interior and exterior estimates and a waste factor
for a total epoxy estimate. Look over your plans and
consider your construction technique to determine
required quantities of WEST SYSTEM additives and fillers.
The current product guide and WEST SYSTEM website
provide estimating guidelines for each of these
materials.
There are two things to consider as you price out WEST
SYSTEM epoxy. First, you have only estimated the
number of pounds of mixed resin and hardener you
will use. Be sure to include resin and hardener totals
so that you won’t make the very common mistake of
over-ordering. Second, consider ordering epoxy more
than once, especially if you are working on a big boat,
depending on your storage facilities, your financial
situation, and your experience. We recommend that
you buy in volume to take advantage of price breaks,
but you may want to order a little less than you think
you’ll need rather than the full quantity. This way, when
it comes time to reorder, you are much more experi-
enced and better able to correctly estimate what’s
required to finish the project.
To complete the hull estimate, think through your
boatbuilding project. Add up the cost of plywood for
lofting and molds and the cost of staples and screws
for molds and hull laminations. If you plan to use glass
cloth or graphite fibers on your hull, rudder, or center-
board, price out the quantities you’ll need. Work out
the cost of paint or varnish. Estimate and include the
prices of core materials. Don’t forget disposable tools
and equipment such as sandpaper, rollers, and brushes.
Add the five portions of the bare hull estimate, making
sure to include a waste allowance in all areas. Raw
materials can represent as little as 10% of the cost of a
finished boat, so it makes sense to overestimate, partic-
ularly in questionable situations. If you order a little
more plywood or lumber than you anticipate needing,
you may be able to avoid the expense and frustration
of running short late in the project.
Detailed Estimates—Hardware Costs
The second major part of the detailed estimate, hardware
costs, begins with an item-by-item inventory of your
54
Getting Started

--- PAGE 69 ---
boat’s hardware, rig, instruments, and engine. These
will vary greatly from vessel to vessel, but their costs
will generally amount to a very high percentage of total
costs.
Because hardware is so expensive, we recommend
that you collect catalogs and price lists from several
manufacturers and distributors. Shop around for the
best deal you can find. Most marine product whole-
salers extend 10% to 50% discounts to professional
boatbuilders and dealers. Some will sell to individual
builders at these prices if they see the prospect of a
reasonable amount of business. Although you probably
won’t be able to get everything you need from a single
source, you might consider sending your hardware
inventory to several distributors and wholesalers and
asking for quotations on it.
A good set of boat plans will list all of the hardware
items needed. Some designers specify manufacturers,
parts, and numbers, and save their builders a great deal
of time during estimating. If there are no hardware
specifications on your drawings, develop an inventory
yourself. This may not be easy. Many different types and
qualities of hardware are sold, and it may be difficult to
choose among them. Apparent bargains may turn out
to be unsuited to your use. Research persistently and
thoroughly and look through publications that objec-
tively evaluate specific equipment. Ask for professional
advice, especially on high-price items like winches,
engines, and rigging. Your final list should include a
description of each piece you need, its manufacturer,
and model number.
Organizing hardware into groups will help you keep
track of them. If the groupings are similar to catalog
categories, you can save time in locating individual
pieces. The following comments about hardware are
broken into five divisions we’ve used over the years.
1. Interior hardware includes everything below the
deck and for large boats can be a major part of
overall hardware cost. Your living area may require
sinks, stove, icebox or refrigerator, toilet, portholes,
vents, and latches. The electrical system includes
wiring, switches, fuse panels, and accessories for
lights, instruments, engine, and appliances. You may
need tanks for fuel and water and holding tanks,
as well as plumbing. Last on the interior hardware
list are the engine and its muffler, shaft, strut, and
stuffing box. The engine itself may be the single
most costly item on your boat.
Most decisions on interior hardware are based on
personal taste and the uses to which the boat will
be put. High-performance racing yachts and family
cruisers have very different requirements. You may
wish to build some items yourself. If so, see instruc-
tions for iceboxes, portholes, vents, and tanks in
Chapter 26.
Your designer may specify engine type and size. If
no engine is recommended in your plans, you must
decide on one yourself. A good rule of thumb for
determining engine size is to allow 1 horsepower
for every 500 pounds of total boat displacement.
We suggest that you consider the choice between
diesel and gasoline engines very carefully. Although
more expensive initially, diesels are usually cheaper
to operate in the long run because of their fuel
economy and lower maintenance costs. Diesel fuel
is much safer than gasoline. Since more boats are
lost to fire than to any other single hazard, we think
this is a good argument for using diesel.
Cost should be a secondary factor in engine selec-
tion. More important over time is the availability
of parts and experienced repair personnel. Cruising
boats in particular may break down in out-of-the-
way places. You can avoid some very significant
potential problems by choosing an engine which
can be easily fixed.
2. Deck hardware requirements can be divided into
three parts. Sail-handling hardware includes blocks,
tracks, winches, and cleats. Lifelines, cleats, chocks,
and ground tackle are practical necessities. Structural
hardware can include items such as chain plates and
steering systems.
Because hardware needs vary so widely, we cannot
offer firm advice to guide your choices. We do recom-
mend, however, that you read over the principles
of hardware installation discussed in Chapter 14,
which may affect your selection of fasteners and
metals, before you estimate your deck hardware costs.
3. The rig contains mast and boom, with tang, sheaves,
and blocks; rigging, including stays, halyards, turn-
buckles, and all electrical items wired through the
Chapter 7 – Estimating Materials and Labor
55

--- PAGE 70 ---
mast; sails and sheet lines. Contact your designer
before making any alterations in the rig specified in
your plans.
You have three options when it comes to masts and
booms. You may build your own. You can purchase
parts and assemble a rig yourself. Finally, several
companies sell high-quality, inexpensive assembled
masts and booms. You may want to ask one of them
for an estimate on your designer’s specifications.
Boatbuilders often have trouble finding specified
extrusions. Ask for professional advice if you find
yourself in this position.
4. Instruments include a compass, depth sounder, log,
and radio. That is the short list. Your list of instru-
ments may be much longer. We think it’s best to buy
all your instruments from one manufacturer. The
advantages of having a single source are twofold: you
may pay less for a package deal, and you will have
to remember only one name if any instrument stops
functioning. Instrument repair is beyond the
capability of most of us, so consider availability
of parts and service when you make your estimate.
5. Keels are made of iron or lead by specialized
foundries. They are usually poured into molds made
from patterns you provide. Find foundry addresses in
advertisements in marine publications and request a
few estimates. In order to avoid the big job of fairing
up a keel, specify the tolerance and finish you want.
The foundry’s quote, usually a per-pound price, will
include mold costs. Lead keels are more common
than iron because they require simpler molds.
When you have worked out all five groups of the
hardware inventory, add them for a total hardware
estimate. Add this to the bare hull estimate to deter-
mine your potential total cash outlay.
Detailed Estimates—Labor
There are so many variables involved in estimating
labor hours for boatbuilding projects that it is almost
impossible to give good general advice. Some spouses
of experienced builders insist that there’s really only
one rule—every stage will take two or three times as
long as they thought it would—but we believe that
it is possible to set a completion date for a boat and
to meet it.
As we see it, four factors determine the amount of
time it takes to build a boat: the size and type of the
boat, the construction method used, the skill of the
builder, and the quality of shop and tools. If you can
control any of these elements, you can significantly
reduce your labor investment.
Builder’s skill is by far the most important of these
factors. We have seen inexperienced boatbuilders
turn out excellent work right from the beginning of
their projects, but they took much longer than experi-
enced people did to do equivalent jobs. We have also
seen non-professionals perform as quickly and as well
as professionals. Builder efficiency is closely related
to tools and facilities; although you can sometimes
compensate for inexperience by having the right tool
for the job, it’s also true that you’ll never work effec-
tively if you’re poorly set up in the first place. See
Chapter 8 for a discussion of tools and boatshops.
Experience has taught us that time requirements also
vary with hull area, especially if scantlings systems
remain constant. As boats get bigger, scantlings usually
grow heavier and labor increases. A 40-foot boat
can take half again as long to build as a 30-footer.
Construction method, too, clearly affects labor hours.
A one-off hull built with the mold method requires a
relatively labor-intensive mold but less hull construc-
tion time than other techniques might. Second and
third boats built on the same mold or with another
method will require much less labor.
To develop your labor hour estimate, figure the time it
will take you to finish a square foot each of hull, deck,
and interior, and multiply these figures by your actual
areas. Do not forget to estimate labor for lofting and
setting up a mold. Then add estimates for installing
miscellaneous but necessary appendages like rudder,
engine, and hardware. Finally, include the time it will
take you to commission the boat.
We find that on average, with a professional crew,
custom one-off hulls and decks for boats up to 30 feet
56
Getting Started

--- PAGE 71 ---
require approximately 2 hours per square foot. This
climbs to 3 hours per foot when boats are 40 feet long.
The same hulls built with the mold method need an
extra hour per foot for mold building, but 30 minutes
less for hull construction. Time requirements for decks
may be slightly less than for hulls, but this depends on
the complexity of cockpit and cabin.
Because interiors can be spartan or luxurious, the hours
they take to complete can vary widely. We usually
estimate interior labor as a function of hull area and
figure that, depending on how elaborate it is, an interior
will take 11⁄2 to 2 1⁄2 hours per square foot of hull. A more
accurate method is to add up the hours you think it will
take to construct each interior fixture. This is tricky,
though, because even the most experienced builders find
it hard to predict the time it will take to build complex
features such as galleys, lockers, and bunks.
Some jobs demand such significant blocks of time that
they must be separately scheduled and estimated.
Installation of deck hardware, including lifelines,
pulpits, winches, sail tracks, and cleats, on sophisti-
cated racers can take an hour per square foot of deck
surface. There are no guidelines for establishing the
time it will take to install keels, rudders, and electronic
gear. Because these features differ so much from boat
to boat, we advise that you look at each closely and
make the best guesses you can.
The process of installing an engine and its tanks,
plumbing, electrical connections, and through-hull
fittings is notoriously time-consuming. Allow well
in excess of 100 hours for this part of your project,
according to its complexity.
Commissioning is the business of taking the boat out of
the shop, putting it in the water, and making it work.
It is almost inevitable that something will not be as it
should be and that you will have to correct minor flaws
and problems. This can use up a sizable chunk of time,
so follow the example of professional builders and
budget extra for it in your estimate.
After tallying various time requirements, you may wish to
add something similar to a materials waste factor. When
we estimate labor for a job, we include a factor of 20% to
account for the time workers spend discussing their
work. This is by no means wasted, unproductive time,
but it does represent a lot of minutes that aren’t devoted
to actual boatbuilding. If you work alone, you might use
the extra time to worry over difficult details or work
around the problems of handling big pieces by yourself.
Set a completion date for your boat and establish inter-
mediate goals for finishing each phase of the project.
Maintain a log of your hours as you go to keep track of
the actual time you’re spending and to indicate progress.
Adjust your timetable if necessary by comparing weekly
and monthly totals to your estimate. This may help
improve your efficiency, keep the project on target, and
keep up your morale.
Estimating material costs and labor is not easy, nor is
it scientific. It’s unlikely that anyone has ever predicted
boat costs to the dollar. Consider a materials estimate
that turns out to be within 10% of actual costs excel-
lent and a labor estimate within 20% of actual time
superior.
With an estimate, even if it’s off by 30%, you have a
sound framework for planning, building, and financing.
Without an estimate, you may have to rely on wild
guesses and blind luck. As you buy your materials and
finish your boat, keep track of receipts and actual hours
and compare these with your projections (keep receipts
for sales tax purposes as well). This is an interesting
exercise for those so inclined, and the records will come
in handy for your next boatbuilding project. 
Chapter 7 – Estimating Materials and Labor
57

--- PAGE 72 ---
58
Getting Started

--- PAGE 73 ---
Tool manufacturers come and go, and several mentioned in the 1985 edition are no longer in business.
Therefore, we have removed specific brand recommendations from this chapter but left the generic tool
descriptions. Additionally, manufacturers have developed tools that did not exist in ’85. Now there are
battery-powered drills and saws, biscuit cutters, electric random orbital sanders, laser levels, small dust
collection and air filtration devices, etc. that are valuable tools to a boatbuilder.
The power tools we recommended in 1985 were top quality with good bearings, well balanced with very 
little vibration. We used them every day and could vouch for their handling characteristics. However,
readers will be wise to re-evaluate the specific recommendations we made in this chapter. Unbiased
information about these tools will require a little research on your part. A good place to start is the tool
evaluations found in woodworking magazines.
You could, if you wanted to, build a boat in a closet,
using no tool but a crooked knife. On the other hand,
you might, in preparation for a major boatbuilding
project, choose to build a solid new workshop and
stock it with thousands of dollars of boatbuilding tools.
We suggest that you settle somewhere between these
extremes.
There are no strict rules about tools and boatshops. 
We think that in most cases it’s best to wait to buy tools
until you know you need them. In all cases, boats
should be built in some sort of shelter. In this chapter,
we will present guidelines for tool inventories and
shops to help you to decide what you need to build
your boat.
Good power tools and working space save time and
increase efficiency. Professional woodworkers, always
mindful that labor is by far the most expensive of their
materials, find that labor-saving electric and air
powered tools quickly pay for themselves. Higher
productivity and lower frustration justify the cost of
maintaining a well-lighted, heated shop with ample
space for work and materials.
If you are an amateur, you will probably have to live
with a compromise. Expensive power tools and an ideal
workshop will save you time, but since you are not
paying for your labor, they may not save you money. 
At the same time, you don’t want to skimp so much 
on overhead that your project becomes a miserable
exercise in muddling through with dull tools or tripping
around cluttered floor space. Boatbuilding is much
more fun when you have good, sharp tools and a well-
ordered shop.
Your financial situation and personal tastes will
ultimately determine your best balance of tools, shop,
time, and money. Within certain limits, boats can as
easily be built in the living room as in a specially-built
shop, so the flexibility and income of your household
may determine your work space. If you plan to
continue building boats, or if you are the kind of
person who takes special pride in tools, it may be
worthwhile to invest in some major equipment. If,
on the other hand, your funds are limited or your
interest uncertain, you will be able to finish your
boat with a minimal tool inventory.
Tools
The boatbuilding methods we use with wood and WEST
SYSTEM® Brand epoxy require fewer tools than tradi-
tional techniques. We rarely need hard-to-find tools like
an adze or slick. In fact, one of the great advantages of
wood/epoxy composite structures is that they can be
built with a small number of readily available hand and
power tools.
Over the years, our shop has developed an inventory 
of hand and power tools, and, like most builders, we
probably have more tools than we really