proper counter-
sink angle.
Large diameter fasteners in shear
Shear load capacity of fasteners over 1⁄4" (6mm) in
diameter depends primarily on the frontal surface area
of the fastener available for load distribution. As a
fastener gets larger, potential load-carrying capacity
increases at a much greater rate than surface area.
Thus, the shear resistance of large fasteners does not
improve geometrically.
Tests of 5⁄16" to 1⁄2" diameter, fully-threaded bolts show
that, using pencil line movement as a criterion, shear
capacity appears to grow linearly with the bolt diameter.
While the strength of a 1⁄2" diameter bolt increased
many times over the 5⁄16" diameter bolt, shear resistance
increased only 45%, or about the same as the increase
in frontal surface area.
In shear loading, fully-threaded bolt shanks are superior
to unthreaded shanks because of the greater surface
area they present. The ability of the threads to key in
the epoxy helps shear-load capacity just as threads also
help tension capacity. The shanks of some solid, rolled-
thread bolts narrow and widen in diameter. Beware of
these—the thicker and thinner shank is a bad combina-
tion from several standpoints. For shear loads, the
undersize shank presents a low frontal area, and this
results in low load potential. Secondly, with this type of
bolt, there is no guarantee that epoxy or epoxy mixtures
will take up the gaps between the shank and the hole,
so premature failure may result.
Procedures for Bonding Fasteners
Choose the specific technique you will use to bond any
fastener after evaluating the loads to which it will be
subjected. Heavily loaded hardware, hardware that will
be loaded in shear, and lightly loaded hardware require
slightly different procedures. Oversize holes are usually
unnecessary for lightly loaded hardware that can be
attached with small screws, but up to a limit are advis-
able in other applications. Fasteners should be washed
with soap and water or a degreaser, but they need no
other surface preparation. Always coat fasteners with
epoxy before inserting them.
To drill a standard-size hole for a machine screw, use a
high-speed metal drill with a diameter approximately
one size under the size of the screw. To drill a pilot hole
for a 1⁄4" diameter machine screw, for example, choose
a 7⁄32" diameter bit. The interference fit which results
gives the screw threads plenty of bite into the wood
fiber and ensures a good bond between the fastener
and the wood when both are coated with epoxy. To
bond a fastener in a standard hole, use a pipe cleaner
or syringe to wet out the hole with WEST SYSTEM epoxy.
Wet out the threads of the screw and install it immedi-
ately. When the epoxy has cured, the fastener will have
about twice the safe working load in spruce or fir as the
same screw installed without epoxy.
There are no firm rules about the diameters of oversize
holes. We recommend that you aim for a cured epoxy
annulus of 1⁄8" to 1⁄4" (3mm–6mm) thick, so select a drill
bit about 1⁄4" larger than actual screw size.
The immediate problem with installing fasteners in
oversize holes is keeping them in position until the
epoxy cures. The best technique is to drill the oversize
hole approximately two-thirds to three-quarters of the
length of the screw shank. This allows the bottom of
the screw to bite into the wood. The fastener can then
center itself in the middle of the hole and, at the same
time, achieve enough holding power to hold the piece
of hardware in place reasonably snug to the surface.
We usually use wood speed bores to drill oversize
holes, grinding the tips to the diameter and length best
suited to the screws we are installing, as shown in
Figure 14-7. If, for example, we were drilling 3⁄8"
diameter oversize holes into which we planned to insert
11⁄2" No. 10 screws, we would buy a 3⁄8" diameter spade
bit, leave its outer flanges intact, and grind its tip to the
right diameter and length for a centering “bite” hole
about 3⁄8" deep. Another way to drill oversize holes is to
Chapter 14 – Hardware Bonding
135

--- PAGE 150 ---
use two bits. Drill about three-quarters of the desired
length with an oversize bit and then drill out the
bottom with a bit which is smaller than the screw. In
either case, keep drill tips sharp. In our testing, we
noticed that wood fibers that are cut cleanly absorb
epoxy better than fibers that have been burnished by
dull drills. Burnished samples also failed more
frequently than clean-cut ones.
Since you fill oversize holes with epoxy before inserting
fasteners, it’s easiest to work on near-horizontal surfaces,
with gravity in your favor. After drilling a hole, remove
all wood chips and fill the hole to the top with epoxy.
Allow the epoxy to soak into the wood for 5 to 10
minutes. This waiting period is extremely important
because a significant portion of the epoxy may be
absorbed by the wood, especially in smaller holes. If
you insert the fastener too soon, the wood may continue
to drain epoxy away from the screw. If, after waiting,
you notice a significant reduction in the epoxy supply,
add more before inserting the fastener. 
In most situations, the fastener will take up a good deal
of the volume of the hole and epoxy will be forced onto
the surface as you insert the fastener. To minimize this
problem, remove some epoxy from the hole with a
syringe just before installing the fastener. You want
some excess to flow out since this will tell you that the
hole is amply supplied with epoxy, so don’t withdraw
too much. A little experience will teach you how much
you can remove without jeopardizing the wood/fastener
bond.
Voids in oversize holes detract from the strength of the
bonded fasteners and should therefore be avoided.
Careful monitoring of epoxy absorption after the initial
5- to 10-minute waiting period will help prevent the
136
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 14-7 Drilling the pilot hole and oversized hole.
Figure 14-8 The oversized hole increases exposed substrate
area and creates an epoxy annulus around the fastener.
Figure 14-9 Bond threaded rods or studs into the substrate
as an alternative to bolts or screws for easily removable
hardware. This is a useful variation for engine, motor, or
machine installations. You can eliminate the pilot hole by
adding another nut to the bottom of the threaded rod for
alignment.
Any drill will do: however, the spade bit will give you more
major diameter surface area for a given hole depth because
of the square cut.
The smaller diameter pilot hole gives the fastener bite into
the blocking holding the fastener and fitting until the epoxy
cures. You can grind the long tip on the spade bit to avoid
drilling through the blocking.
Oversized Hole
Pilot Hole
3/4
1/4
X
x + 1/4"

--- PAGE 151 ---
voids which can result when the wood absorbs so
much epoxy that little is left for bonding the fastener.
Other typical problems, shown in Figure 14-7, caused
by air bubbles from the epoxy mixture and air pockets
in the oversize hole, can be eliminated with efficient
work habits. Stir the epoxy mixture carefully, getting as
little air as possible into it, and always begin filling an
oversize hole at its bottom and work up.
It’s more difficult to install fasteners in oversize holes on
vertical surfaces. Here, a two-step application procedure
works well. First, use a pipe cleaner to wet out the hole
with unthickened epoxy. Wait a few minutes and then
use a syringe to fill the hole with a thick mixture of
epoxy and WEST SYSTEM 404 High-Density Filler. The
adhesive should be thick enough to stay in the hole
without running, but not so thick that it cannot be
administered with the syringe. To load it into the
syringe, remove the plunger and force the epoxy
mixture down into the barrel with a paddle. Begin
injecting the epoxy into the bottom of the hole and
work up. Try to avoid trapping air in the cavity as
you proceed.
In situations where a screw hole—standard or
oversize—is horizontal or extremely deep and the
syringe is not long enough to reach to the bottom of
the hole, slide a thin drinking straw over its tip. Insert
the straw into the hole and, starting at the bottom
and working up, inject unthickened epoxy. Let this
penetrate for a few minutes and then use the same
tool and technique to inject a mixture of 404 High-
Density Filler and epoxy.
Before inserting the fastener into the epoxy-filled hole,
coat it liberally with the thickened epoxy mixture to
mechanically fill all its threads. If an uncoated fastener
is inserted in the hole, its threads may not completely
fill with adhesive and the quality of the bond may be
reduced. An advantage of the two-step process is that
adhesive which oozes from the hole doesn’t run and can
be removed with a putty knife.
Procedures for Bonding
Hardware (Fittings) 
Hardware bonding has one disadvantage. In most cases,
it requires more time than normal hardware installation
methods because of the added steps required. After you
have gained some experience with hardware bonding,
however, the extra time required will not be substantial,
and we assure you that the results will be worthwhile.
For example, chain plates are usually very heavily
loaded, and their fasteners are usually loaded in perfect
shear. Chain plate movement has always been a
common problem with wooden boats, but it is easily
solved with hardware bonding. Design criteria for chain
plates should include maximizing bonding surface area
of the chain plate strap for maximum load distribution.
Bonding hardware in place is much easier if you do it
before the boat receives its final paint job, but then the
painting job is made more difficult because you must
protect the installed items and paint around them. The
Chapter 14 – Hardware Bonding
137
Figure 14-10 Use a syringe to fill oversized holes.
Figure 14-11 Potential problems with bonded fasteners.
Air pockets in
thickened mixture.
Void from epoxy soaking
into wood.
Bubbles from the
mixture.

--- PAGE 152 ---
only problem with installing hardware on a newly
painted surface is the possibility of contaminating the
new finish. The hardware bonding process can be
messy. While keeping the newly painted surface clean
is possible, it involves a cost in time. In our own shop,
we don’t have a set policy, but look at the individual job
and try to determine what installation procedure will
save the most time. Often, we will install some hardware
items before painting (especially difficult pieces, such as
large winches and track), and then install the rest of the
hardware items (those which are most difficult to paint
around) after final painting.
Preparing Metal Surfaces for Bonding
WEST SYSTEM epoxy can be used to make good bonds
with most metals, an ability which makes the hardware
bonding concept practical. There are problems with
developing good bonds, however, and preparation of
metal surfaces is necessary for good adhesion.
Metal surface preparation for adhesive bonding is a
relatively new and complex field, and there are several
schools of thought. For those interested in completely
researching the subject, we recommend the Handbook
of Adhesive Bonding by Charles V. Cagle (McGraw Hill,
Inc., New York, 1982). For the most part, super
bonding with metals is not necessarily a requirement
for metal/wood bonding. Invariably, wood grain
strength itself is the limiting factor. In most cases, there
is no need to achieve an epoxy-to-metal bond that is
any stronger than the limiting factor of wood grain
strength.
The bonding surfaces of many hardware items may
already be grooved or rough, and you can use this to
advantage. The bottom of a typical winch base, for
example, has deep machine marks as well as a hollow
central core area. If epoxy is allowed to well up in this
hollow area, it will form a fillet around the inner lip of
the base, and this will transfer load. Even if you do not
make a good bond with the metal itself, the machine
marks and core will provide excellent shear resistance
through mechanical keying.
To increase the keying potential of any fitting, drill a
series of small, shallow holes into which epoxy can
flow. Ports, vents, hatches, and other non-critical
hardware items that will not be subjected to high loads
probably do not need this special surface preparation.
However, they should be bedded in a thickened high-
density epoxy mixture to be sure that there will be no
gaps between them and the hull surface to which they
are fastened.
The following paragraphs describe preparation methods
that we have used successfully on a variety of metals
to achieve the wood grain strength criterion easily.
Structural values which can be expected with various
types of wood on a pounds-per-square-inch basis are
listed in the mechanical property tables in Appendix B-1.
If you bond the hardware item perpendicular to the
grain structure, you can assume only 60% of this figure.
Shear strength properties of wood rarely exceed 2,000
psi, and usually are closer to 1,000 psi. You can make
bonds with metals that are above 2,000 psi, but you
need extremely good preparation of the metal surface.
Aluminum—Aluminum has always been difficult to
bond, but simplified surface preparation systems have
made the task somewhat easier. The first step usually
uses an acid wash solution to etch, clean, and mill the
surface. The second step, generally an alodine conver-
sion coating, stabilizes the aluminum and minimizes
the corrosion that may form upon contact with air
before you apply the epoxy adhesive. The WEST SYSTEM
860 Aluminum Etch Kit contains all necessary ingredi-
ents and complete instructions. If you use another
surface preparation system, carefully follow the
manufacturer’s instructions.
Steel—(Including all 300 series stainless steels)1—The
preparation of a steel surface involves four steps. The
first step is to get the metal surface as clean as possible.
You can accomplish this with a solvent wash, using
plain white paper towels to remove all grease and oil.
You should wipe any unusually dirty surfaces several
times so that no possible contamination is left on the
surface. The next step is to sand the surface with coarse
sandpaper (60-grit or 80-grit wet or dry) to remove all
mill scale and rust and expose fresh, clean metal. Step
three is to cover the sanded metal surface with a thin
coating of epoxy. The fourth and final step is to
immediately sand the metal surface (60-grit paper)
again, while the epoxy is still in its uncured state. (See
Figures 14-12, 14-13, and 14-14.) This procedure
resembles wet sanding with water, but substitutes
138
Core Boatbuilding Techniques

--- PAGE 153 ---
epoxy for the water. The goal is to expose fresh metal,
allowing it to come in contact immediately with epoxy
instead of air, which can cause corrosion to begin
quickly. (Besides contamination, corrosion is considered
a major cause of poor bonding.) When you have
completed the fourth step, you are ready to bond the
hardware into position. Sometimes we allow this initial
epoxy coating to cure for later bonding. Then all that
we need to do to prepare the surface for bonding at a
later time is to clean and lightly sand the cured epoxy
surface for good adhesion.
Bronze Alloys—High copper content metals are partic-
ularly difficult to bond to, which is probably due to
copper’s fast oxidation rate. Most of the time, we
prepare a bronze bonding surface in the same manner
as we do steel. In addition, we try to abrade the surface
physically as much as is practical to achieve mechanical
keying between the epoxy and metal surface.
Preparing and Bonding the Fitting
Whether you are bonding hardware before or after
painting, begin by positioning the fitting and carefully
marking fastener hole centers. You can use any tool that
makes a hole big enough to be useful as a center for
drilling—we usually choose an awl for this job. Take
particular care to center the starter holes in the fastener
holes. When they are marked, check them. If one
appears to be a little off, move it as needed for accuracy.
Next, remove the fitting and drill out the holes with
an appropriate drill bit. The bit should be sharp and
evenly-ground because dull bits tend to travel. To
control the depth of the hole, stick a small piece of tape
to the bit to mark the length of the fastener, remem-
bering to subtract the thickness of the hardware. If you
have a variable speed drill motor, start slowly and speed
up after you have gone a quarter of the way. Sight your
drill from the side and front to be certain that you are
not angling it.
Hole sizes depend on the loads to which the hardware
you are installing will be subjected. If you are working
on a fitting that can be attached with small screws and
will only be used in light load applications, drill a
standard pilot hole. If the item will be subjected to
shear loads, as cleats are, drill a standard pilot hole and
then switch to a drill bit about 1⁄4" (6mm) larger in
diameter. Use this to drill out the upper half of the 
hole. If you are attaching a winch, mooring cleat, chain
plate for standing rigging, or other similar hardware,
use coarse machine screws. Drill holes about 1⁄4" bigger
than the screws, three-quarters of the depth of the hole.
Then, use a bit 1⁄16" smaller than the screws to drill out
the bottom of the holes until they are longer than the
machine screws.
After all the holes are drilled, remove any wood chips
from the individual holes and the surrounding area.
Reposition the hardware to see if all drilled holes line
up with those on the piece of hardware. (One of the
advantages of using oversize holes for fastener bonding
is that the fit is not so critical.) If everything lines up all
right, leave the hardware temporarily in place with the
fasteners set in their holes (using just a few turns so
they don’t fall out) and move on to the next hardware
item and proceed to mark and drill for it. Preparing a
number of hardware items simultaneously in this
manner for bonding is more efficient than completely
installing each hardware item individually from start to
Chapter 14 – Hardware Bonding
139
1Understanding Crevice Corrosion
The process of fastener bonding has been criticized because crevice corrosion can possibly cause premature failures in bonded hardware. However, crevice corrosion occurs
under very unusual conditions and can be prevented.
300 Series stainless steel is commonly used in marine applications. Nuts, bolts, cable, turnbuckles, etc. are generally made of 302, 303, or 304 stainless steel. 316 stainless
steel is frequently specified for propeller shafts and other underwater use. 300 Series stainless is more corrosion resistant than other stainless steel series because of its high
chromium content. The chromium combines with oxygen to provide a major part of its corrosion resistance.
We think of stainless steel as “bullet proof” when it comes to corrosion, but this is not always the case. There must be sufficient oxygen to interact with the chromium. In
normal conditions, there is an ample supply, even under water. However, if there is not enough oxygen to combine with the chromium, stainless steel cannot passivate, or
create a self-protective oxide. 
Under unusual circumstances, fastener bonding can create an area of low oxygen content. Occasionally, a small crack can develop between the fitting and the epoxy. The
oxygen content in the hairline crack can be very low, and, if salt water is introduced, a galvanic cell is created and crevice corrosion can occur. The rate of corrosion under a
low oxygen condition can be as rapid as regular steel.
Therefore, it is a good idea to use a flexible sealant such as silicon caulk at the point where a fastener emerges from the epoxy annulus. A sealant at this point will prevent
water from entering any hairline cracks that may occur. Routine inspection and maintenance of all hardware fittings should be performed often, especially when sailing in
warm, tropical waters.

--- PAGE 154 ---
finish. The hardware placement, marking, and drilling
procedures differ from the procedures needed for the
bonding operation. Just gathering together the proper
tools (or materials) for either operation requires consid-
erable time, and you increase efficiency if you minimize
this unavoidable start-up time.
If you are bonding hardware to a surface that has
received its final paint finish, there is one more step
that you must take before bonding begins. After you
set the hardware in final position, draw a pencil line
around its perimeter. Remove the hardware and apply
tape, usually 2" (50mm) wide, around the perimeter of
the pencil line, overlapping slightly so that the entire
mark is covered. Reposition the hardware, using the
drilled fastener holes as guides, and then carefully cut
through the overlapping tape with a sharp blade, using
the hardware perimeter as a guide. In this process, do
not cut through the epoxy surface. Use only enough
pressure on the blade to cut through the tape. Remove
the hardware and peel away the tape in the bonding
area, leaving a taped outline which perfectly matches
the hardware perimeter. The final step is to scrape away
the paint in the bonding area with a sharp edge tool
down to the cured epoxy surface, being careful not to
disturb the taped outline border. You can then proceed
with hardware bonding without getting epoxy on the
painted surface immediately surrounding the hardware
item.
You can prepare the bonding surface area on many
hardware items well before installation. For example,
you can surface treat aluminum items many hours
ahead of actual bonding if you take care that the
bonding surface does not become contaminated.
(Don’t touch the bonding surface.) You can clean with
solvent and sand steel and bronze items ahead of time
(see Figure 14-12). Then at installation you need only
coat them with epoxy and re-sand them before bonding
(see Figures 14-13 and 14-14). You should also clean
the cured epoxy surface to which you will bond the
hardware, using a solvent or water. Lightly sand the
surface, especially if it has not been sanded up to 
this point.
Next, apply epoxy to the hole. The techniques for
doing this vary according to the anticipated loading
on the fitting and the size of the hole. In all cases,
however, a clock starts when you begin to work: the
hardware must be in place before the epoxy in the
fastener holes sets up. Oversize holes can contain
epoxy concentrations high enough to speed up the
exothermic reaction and shorten working time consid-
erably. In hot weather, even with slow hardener, holes
over 1⁄2" (12mm) in diameter may start to gel in 20 to
30 minutes. Plan the installation procedure so that it 
can be completed as rapidly as possible.
If you have drilled standard pilot holes or oversize
holes for small fittings that will be loaded in shear,
follow the procedures already discussed for bonding
small fasteners. If you are using coarse machines screws
in oversize holes for heavy duty hardware such as a
winch or mooring cleat, wet out the hole with WEST
SYSTEM epoxy and fill it with a thick mixture of epoxy
and 404 High-Density Filler as described for perpendi-
cular surfaces. Then coat and install the fastener.
When you have filled the fastener holes, coat both the
hardware and the surface to which it will be bonded. If
the surfaces mate perfectly, you can use epoxy with no
additives, but if there are voids or gaps between them,
mix 404 High-Density Filler with the epoxy to desired
viscosity. Apply the mixture to both surfaces, using more
where needed to fill gaps. (Try to visualize the high and
low areas as the fitting is sitting on the bare surface.)
With practice, you can apply the right amount of epoxy
to the hardware, enough that there is reasonable excess
140
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 14-12 Sand the bonding surface of steel and bronze
fittings with coarse sandpaper.

--- PAGE 155 ---
to indicate 100% contact, but not so much that large
globs squeeze out when you set the item in place.
After applying epoxy to the surfaces, put the fitting
back in position and coat and install all the fasteners,
tightening them until everything is snug (see Figure 14-
15). Clean away any epoxy which squeezes out as the
item is bedded down. Use a putty knife or narrow
plastic spreader to remove most of the excess and paper
towels or rags to clean up some of the thinner epoxy.
We use solvent with paper towel on unpainted surfaces
when this is necessary for a thorough job. Dry cheese-
cloth works well for removing the last uncured epoxy
residue. If a lot of epoxy squeezes out, you have applied
more than was needed, either to the hardware surface or
to an oversize hole. Try reducing the quantity on the
next item until a small but healthy amount of epoxy
squeezes out.
Casting Hardware in Place
Sometimes, fittings must be set at specific angles to the
hull surface to which they are attached. Winches, for
example, are angled to maintain a proper lead. Lifeline
bases, turning blocks, and engine mounts often must be
arranged in a manner that doesn’t permit them to
sit flat against a surface. Wedge-shaped wood bases
and shims are usually used to support these items,
but making them takes a great deal of time and skill,
especially on surfaces with a lot of camber. With the
hardware casting process, you can save a lot of time
and end up with superior results.
To begin casting, clean the wood/epoxy surface and set
the fitting in position, resting it on three points. One of
these points is generally the lower end of the item itself
and the other two are small, temporary wood props—
wedges work well—cut to the right height. When you
have the hardware exactly where you want it, load a
syringe with about a 50%-50% mixture of 404 High-
Density and 406 Colloidal Silica Fillers and epoxy.
Inject the thickened epoxy within the perimeter of 
Chapter 14 – Hardware Bonding
141
Figure 14-13 Apply epoxy to the bonding surface.
Figure 14-14 Wet sand the epoxy into the bonding surface.
Figure 14-15 Tighten fasteners or increase clamping
pressure until a small amount of epoxy squeezes from
the joint.
Epoxy squeeze out
Backing plate on
thinner substrate

--- PAGE 156 ---
the fitting to build up several areas of contact between
the two bonding surfaces, as in Figure 14-17. When
this epoxy support or bridging has cured, carefully
mark the position of the hardware and then tap it 
with a mallet to break it loose. Up to this point, 
you have drilled no holes, and you haven’t cleaned 
the hardware surface.
Remove the two temporary wood positioning points
and fill the bonding area solid with sufficient amounts
of a 404/406/epoxy mixture to fill all anticipated voids
between bonding surfaces. If standard-size holes for
fasteners are to be used, you can prepare the hardware
bonding surface for final bonding. If oversize holes are
to be used, you’ll need to remove the hardware once
again after the casting epoxy has cured to drill the
larger holes. At this point, if you have a piece of
hardware with a lot of surface area, you may want to
coat the hardware bonding surface with a release agent
to facilitate removal. If a release agent is used,
remember that after you remove the hardware, you
must clean both the epoxy and the metal surface
carefully to remove the release agent material so that
proper bonding can take place. Don’t forget to mark
the centers of the oversize holes to be drilled before
removing the hardware. This may require chipping
some excess cured epoxy out of the hardware fastener
holes.
142
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 14-16 Bonded hardware on the deck and cabin top of
IOR 1⁄2-ton racer Hot Flash. Several of the fittings have pads
that were cast in place.
Figure 14-17 Steps for casting a pad for a winch.
1
2
3
4
Winch stem base
(disassemble the winch
to ease installation and
cleaning)
Wood spacer
Pads of 404/406
mixture
Cast base
Fasteners bonded
to blocking
Stem
Carefully clean thickened epoxy
off base during installation
Vary length to achieve even
penetration of blocking
Pad painted with
deck or trim
Winch
assembled

--- PAGE 157 ---
When you set the hardware in final position, excess
epoxy mixture will flow out from the hardware
perimeter. You will need to clean it away. This may
require a bit of sculpting, especially if the cast portion
is large. We usually make up a wood paddle to the
shape desired so that we can get the best effect when
making a final pass across the uncured epoxy surface.
If you don’t get the results that you’d like, don’t worry.
You can sand, file, or refill the surface to develop the
final desired shape.
When the casting has cured, you can drill the holes for
the fasteners and install the fasteners themselves in the
appropriate manner. We caution you to remember to
adjust the fastener lengths for the angle change of the
hardware so that you get the same amount of fastener
penetration into the wood fiber.
Removing Bonded Fasteners
and Hardware
The bond between a fastener and WEST SYSTEM epoxy is
strong, but, with the right procedures, you can break it
to remove the fastener from the wood. If you know you
will want to extract a fastener at some point in the
future, coat it with wax, spray cooking oil, or a mold
release before installing it. Although the wax will interfere
with the metal/epoxy bond, it will not compromise the
mechanical keying around the threads which provides
the major load-transfer capability.
Bonded fasteners can often be removed with reasonable
force. If you have trouble loosening them, heat fasteners
with a soldering gun or iron until the surrounding
epoxy softens. Attach a cutting tip to a soldering gun
and insert it in the slot at the top of smaller screws to
free them. Larger fasteners with more root diameter
can frequently be forced without breaking. However,
heating them to around 250°F (121°C) softens the
epoxy and makes the job much easier.
When you heat WEST SYSTEM epoxy to remove a fastener,
you may destroy some of its physical properties. Drill
out the hole completely and start afresh when you
replace the fastener.
To remove, hardware that has been bonded or cast in
position, use heat. At temperatures above 250°F
(121°C), cured epoxy becomes considerably weaker
than at room temperature. The epoxy softens and its
bonding capability reduces considerably. Begin by
removing any fasteners. Then heat the fitting itself with
a propane torch. A sharp rap with a mallet will usually
dislodge the hardware at this point. If the fitting doesn’t
break loose easily, don’t force it. Heat it a second time
and try again. 
Drill out all cured epoxy before reattaching the fitting to
the deck surface.
Bonding Ballast Keels to Wood Hulls
Heavy ballast keels, especially fin keels, can produce
extreme high point loading. The problem is so difficult
with some designs that even fiberglass boats using
much higher density glass fiber have had difficulties
at the keel/hull connection point. By applying our
hardware bonding techniques to the process of keel
installation, however, we have found a very successful
solution to the problem of attaching keels.
The standard procedure for attaching a keel has been
to use two rows of bolts installed as close to the outer
edges of the keel as possible. These run from the keel
into the hull and usually through laminated floors,
which distribute load throughout the hull skin. The
keel bolts are tightened with nuts inside the hull to
snug the keel up against it. Large washers or plates
distribute compression loads through the floors.
When a boat with a standard, unbonded keel installa-
tion heels, tension loads are transmitted through the
bolts to the upper outboard edge, and compression
loads are transmitted directly from the keel to the wood
Chapter 14 – Hardware Bonding
143
Figure 14-18 Soldering tips for heating small fasteners for
removal from epoxy.

--- PAGE 158 ---
it touches on the bottom of the boat. Unbonded keel
bolts cannot distribute compression loads. If the wood
fiber in the immediate vicinity of the keel does not have
sufficient crush resistance, the keel edge will begin to
crush it. If the keel bolts are not continually tightened,
the keel will loosen, and this will cause movement,
which further damages the wood fiber.
When keel bolts are bonded in oversize holes in appro-
priate amounts and types of wood fiber, these problems
are eliminated. A bonded bolt is far superior to the
standard nut and washer in transmitting tension loads
over a much greater surface area. More importantly,
bonded keel bolts can withstand compression loads as
well as tension loads, while up to this point keel bolts
were never capable of distributing compression loads.
Bonded bolts induce shear loading into the surrounding
structure, and it is irrelevant whether this shear load is
caused by tension or compression forces. The load
change factor, which causes such great problems in
normal keel installations, is of little concern when
bonded bolts are used to distribute load.
In designing a bonded keel bolt installation, the goal is
to achieve an arrangement which successfully distrib-
utes load over enough surface area that no part of the
attached wood fiber is overloaded. Heavier keels will
obviously cause more loading than lighter keels, but the
bolt arrangement pattern may also be a big factor. In a
thin-sectioned keel, bolts will be set closer together, and
this will cause higher input loadings to the bolts due to
their decreased leverage. Other variables affecting load
distribution are the number and size of the bolts and
the thickness and density of the wood in which they
are bonded. (Note: To make fastener bonding more
effective on keel bolts, the bolts should have contin-
uous threads from the top of the keel to the inboard
end.) 
We usually use higher density woods for laminated
floors because of their substantially higher structural
capacity, especially in shear. Laminated floors are low in
the hull cavity and centrally located, so the extra weight
of denser wood is of little concern. We tend to choose
Honduras mahogany because it is available in our area,
but any of a number of wood species may be used as
long as they bond well with WEST SYSTEM epoxy. Make
a few sample laminations to be sure that the wood you
select for laminated floors is compatible with epoxy. See
Chapter 19 for more details on keelson construction.
Installing Bonded Keels
Work out the details of the keel assembly early in your
project. Its design will affect the interior structure of
the hull and the number, size, and locations of
laminated frames. When you have decided how to
144
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 14-19 Cross section view of bonded keel bolts.
Figure 14-20 Cross section view demonstrating design
considerations in bonded keel bolts. Tension and compression
forces are transmitted as a shear load by the resin bond
between the keel bolt and the wooden structural members.
Bonded keel bolts are immobilized and there is no chance
for the edge of the ballast keel to crush the soft planking of
the hull bottom. Bonding also keeps the keel bolt nuts and
washers from embedding into the keelson.
Keelson
Frame/Floor
Planking
Keel bolt
Lead ballast
Keel
Blocking
Oversize hole
epoxy filled
Floor
timber
Epoxy in shear
Keelson
Planking
Bolt in
tension
Bolt in compression
LOAD
(Lateral resistance)

--- PAGE 159 ---
achieve optimum load distribution, begin preparing for
keel installation. Do this well in advance so that when
the time comes, the task of joining the keel and the hull
can be accomplished with the least amount of grief.
Pour the keel as soon as possible so that you will have
plenty of time to prepare it for final installation. Clean
the casting and then rough up its surface with a wire
brush to remove oxidation. Coat the keel with epoxy
and, while the epoxy is still wet, scrub it again with
the wire brush. WEST SYSTEM epoxy bonds well to clean
lead surfaces. This coating will improve both paint
adhesion and the interface between the high-density
lead and lower density epoxy, and it will also reduce
immediate oxidation. Fair the top of the keel where it
will meet the hull. If it’s very heavy, you may want to
build a special fixture for the keel so that you can roll
it around the shop. (See Figures 14-23 and 14-24.)
By far the easiest way to install bolts in a keel is to put
them in a temporary fixture and pour the lead around
them as the keel is made. When the bolts are in place,
check them for dimensional accuracy. They must be
perpendicular to the bonding surface of the keel and
each must be parallel, both fore and aft and sideways,
to the others.
The next step is make a pattern which sits on the top
of the keel, as in Figure 14-21, to accurately record the
locations of the individual bolts so that you can transfer
them to the hull and drill holes to receive the bolts. For
this, you will need a sheet of plywood at least as long
and as wide as the top of the keel. Mark the pattern
with an accurate fore and aft position for the keel so
that when you line it up on the hull, the centerlines
of the keel and hull line up. Then set it on top of the
bolts. Line up the pattern and mark the locations of
each keel bolt. Rough cut bolt holes, allowing a wide
margin around each one so that the pattern drops easily
onto the top of the keel. Push it down until it lies flush.
When this is done, make small square or round
plywood pads for every bolt and drill the exact keel
bolt hole diameter in the center of each piece. Slip a
pad over each bolt, centering holes around the bolts,
and staple in place. Then ask several people to help
you lift the pattern straight up and off the keel. If it
catches on misaligned bolts, bend them as necessary.
Correct any misalignment now; interference fits from
out-of-parallel bolts can cause a great deal of trouble
when the keel is installed.
If you haven’t yet installed laminated floor timbers, use
this keel pattern and the existing keel bolt arrangement
as guides to do the job more accurately. If the floor
timbers are already in place, adjust the pattern so that
the bolts pass through all of them to best advantage.
Position the plywood pattern carefully on the centerline
and mark the bolt holes carefully on the floors or
keelson.
Determine the diameter of the holes through the floors
before you start drilling. The hole diameter should be a
least 1⁄8" (3mm) larger than the keel bolt. An important
limitation on hole size is the size of each laminated
floor timber. A larger oversize hole will distribute load
over more surface area, but if you remove too much
material, the floor timber may be weakened. Balance
the surface area needed for load distribution against the
dimensions of the floor timbers before making a final
decision on hole size.
There are both advantages and disadvantages to
increasing the diameter of an oversize hole. It’s very
difficult to maintain even 1⁄16" (1mm) tolerances over a
series of holes. If you increase hole diameter, you don’t
Chapter 14 – Hardware Bonding
145
Figure 14-21 Making a pattern of the keel bolt locations that
can be transferred to the keel for drilling.
Centerline of ballast keel
marked on the pattern
Scrap plywood
Oversize holes in
plywood
Lead Keel
Plywood pads with holes drilled to the
diameter of the keel bolts are dropped
over the bolts and stapled to the main
piece of the pattern

--- PAGE 160 ---
have to worry so much about close tolerances as you
drill. Increasing the diameter by 1⁄4" (6mm), for an
annulus radius of 1⁄8" (3mm) makes the job of final
fitting the hull and keel much easier.
To drill the marked keel bolt holes, either use a drilling
jig or ask a few friends to help you do it by eye. In
either case, you need a drill which has a big motor and
in which you can chuck a large bit. The drill bit should
have a long shank: in some situations 20" to 30" (500-
750 mm) is an ideal length range. If you can’t purchase
drill bits that are long enough, have a machine shop
weld a shank onto a standard bit.
The main goal of the drilling operation is to make all
of the keel bolt holes exactly parallel, matching the bolt
arrangement on the keel. Although it takes some time
to fabricate, a drilling jig produces maximum accuracy.
There are several ways to make jigs. One successful
and simple method is to drill a hole in a large block
of wood, using a drill press to make sure that it is
absolutely square and perpendicular to the bottom of
the block. Another method, shown in Figure 14-22, is
to start with two pieces of stock, saw a line down the
center of each, bond the pieces together, and use the
kerfs as a guide for drilling. You can also rout half-holes
in two pieces of wood and glue them together.
When you have made the jig, set it in the hull. Keep
the bottom of the block in a perfectly flat plane to
guide the drill bit as you move from hole to hole. To
establish a common flat surface for all of the holes,
clamp a thick sheet of plywood over the laminated
floor on which you are working and check it with a
level. Cut oversize holes in the plywood in the area of
the drilling so that you can locate the marks you’ve
made on the keelson or laminated floor. With the drill
bit itself as a guide, drill starter holes at least 1⁄2" (12mm)
deep at all locations in order to line the jig up correctly.
It’s a good idea to use a clamp or cleat to hold the jig in
place as you drill.
Although a jig is preferable, you can achieve reasonable
accuracy using a simple sight method to drill the holes.
This method relies on the coordinated efforts of three
individuals: one to do the actual drilling and two “direc-
tors” to sight the position of the drill bit with the use of
levels. This method requires that the drill bit shaft be as
long as possible, permitting maximum visual accuracy
in lining up the drill. The two directors must be able
to view the drill, one from the front and one from 90°
to the side, using levels on end to sight and direct the
proper positioning of the drill. The driller stands where
he can see the two directors, who point out to him
the direction that the drill motor should be moved to
maintain a true vertical plane while drilling. The first
2" to 3" (50 to 75mm) of drilling are the most crucial
because from there on it will be very difficult to change
the direction of the drill. In order for this method to
work, the hull must still be on its lines and the keel
bolts must be oriented perpendicular to the waterline
dimension as they sit in the ballast keel.
The lining up of the keel bolt pattern, marking of holes,
and the drilling operation can all take place either on
the inside of a hull or on the outside (prior to turning
the hull upright). If you mark and drill from the outside,
the only added difficulty is that you must mark the
exact centerline of the hull and the fore and aft positions
of the various laminated floor members. You should not
remove the hull from its construction set-up before you
transfer these dimensions with the use of a long level,
both in the athwartship and longitudinal directions.
146
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 14-22 A jig for drilling keel bolt holes.
2 pieces of 3" x 6" stock squared and
carved with saw kerf down the center
of each piece
Saw kerf used
as guide for
worm on drill
Pieces
bonded
together
Hole for keel bolt drill completed
and jig set up for drilling

--- PAGE 161 ---
When you have drilled all of the holes, position the
keel bolt pattern on both the inside and outside of the
hull over the drilled holes to check them for accuracy.
The holes will usually line up very accurately from the
side that you started drilling from, but the opposite
side of the hull may show some inaccuracy caused by
improper lineup or wandering of the drill bit. Carefully
mark these errors and then use a round wood rasp to
move the dimension of the hole toward the direction
needed to straighten it out with the pattern. Usually,
this situation causes no harm, only a slightly enlarged
hole which has the positive effect of increasing surface
area. The only disadvantage is the possible weakening
of the laminated floor itself. However, this should be a
minor problem in most situations. Make a final, careful
check with the keel bolt pattern to assure yourself that
the drilled holes in the hull will indeed receive the bolts
protruding from the ballast keel with no interference
from the wood itself. Then you can begin final prepara-
tions for a ballast keel/hull union.
Usually, this is the last major job on a boat, and you can
do it just before launching. Up to the time you install
the keel, you will probably want the hull close to the
floor for easy access. To install the keel, however, you
will have to jack the hull up high enough to have room
to roll the keel and its bolts into position. When the
keel is in rough position, move it as necessary until you
can lower the hull onto it.
When you have lined up the keel bolts with the bolt
holes, you can set the hull down over the top of the
bolts, leaving a gap of about 2" or 3" (50 or 75mm)
between hull and keel. At this point, you can take final
measurements to note any possible discrepancies
between the mating surfaces of the keel and hull.
Check the keel bolts visually to make sure that there
are no hang-ups that could prevent the hull from seating
flush with the keel’s mating surface.
Coat areas of the mating surface on the bottom of the
hull from the foremost keel bolt forward and from the
aftermost keel bolt aft with a parting agent to prevent
epoxy from bonding in these areas. The reason for this
is that the ballast keel is a rigid, non-flexing mass, while
the wood hull structure is not. Invariably, over a period
of time, movement will take place between parts of the
keel and hull. It will occur just beyond the outermost
keel bolts, both fore and aft, creating small, hairline
cracks. If you bond the keel with epoxy to the hull,
these cracks will occur within the wood structure itself,
providing points of moisture entry into the wood fiber.
The parting agent causes the cracks to occur between
Chapter 14 – Hardware Bonding
147
Figure 14-23 A keel set up in a specially-built handling fixture
so it can be final faired and moved around.
Figure 14-24 Rolling a 10,000-pound keel into position on a
handling fixture. The keel can be shifted slightly from side to
side and fore and aft.

--- PAGE 162 ---
epoxy-protected surfaces, allowing water to seep
harmlessly between them.
The lead surface itself should already be fairly clean,
but a light sanding with some sandpaper will expose
fresh metal for good bonding with the epoxy. The
mating surfaces are now ready for a final fitting. The
only thing left to do is to establish some reference
measuring points to ensure that the keel itself is indeed
in perfect position with the hull before any epoxy
cures. Proper preparation should help ensure the keel
will settle in an accurate fore-and-aft position when the
hull is set flush upon it, but sometimes a keel, rather
than sitting perfectly true with a hull athwartship, will
favor one side or the other. If you have accurate water-
lines inscribed on the hull, you can take measurements
from these points a set distance aft on either side down
to the very bottom of the keel and adjust the hull so
that this dimension is the same on either side.
The final setting of the keel requires the coordinated
efforts of several people. Make up enough epoxy
mixture at one time to cover the entire bonding surface
of the keel, using equal proportions of 406 Colloidal
Silica and 404 High-Density Filler. You need enough
thickened epoxy to be sure that no gaps will remain
anywhere between the hull and the keel, a quantity
sometimes so large that two or three people mix
separate pots simultaneously. The mixture should be
so thick that it will not run.
Liberally spread it over the entire mating surface.
Lightly coat the bottom of the hull. Remember,
however, that you begin to work with a time handicap
the moment you apply the adhesive. The hull must be
set down on the keel and trued up before the epoxy
cures. In most situations, this means that you have
from 20 minutes to 1 hour for the operation. If you
are well prepared, this should present no problems.
When the hull is in final position, excess epoxy will
squeeze out of the keel/hull joint. If the mixture is as
thick as it should be, it will not run down the sides of
the keel. Remove the excess and use it to make a fillet
between the keel and the hull if desired. Use solvent
and paper towels to clean up any leftover adhesive on
either the keel or the hull.
When the epoxy between the hull and the keel has
cured, begin the second stage of bonding the keel.
Use a syringe to fill each keel bolt hole to the top
with unthickened epoxy. Feed each hole continually
because large amounts will soak into the significant
wood surface area in the hole. As you do this, it
sometimes helps to run a piece of wire up and down
around the keel bolts to help remove air bubbles and
trapped air. When this epoxy cures, install washers and
nuts to complete the keel.
Removable Bonded Keels
The biggest problem with bonded keels is removing
them. Bonded keel bolts can be extracted, but with
difficulty. If for some reason you decide to remove a
bonded keel, try using a cutter made from steel tubing,
which passes outside of the keel bolts.
If you plan to remove a keel on a regular basis for
shipping or trailering, use the following alternate keel
assembly technique. Instead of attaching bolts to wood
fiber, thread or groove the exterior surfaces of sections
of stainless steel pipe. Fasten the keel bolts through
these sleeves, as shown in Figure 14-26. The bonded
pipe transmits keel load through a large surface area.
With a little modification, this basic idea can be used
to attach other removable through-hull fittings.
148
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 14-25 A custom keel bolt cutter can be made from
steel tubing and a standard hole saw.
Threaded Rod
Steel Conduit
Cut Off Hole Saw
Grind threads
to form a
smooth shank
Weld and grind
smooth

--- PAGE 163 ---
Choose stainless pipe or tubing of sufficient inner
diameter to allow a keel bolt to pass through it. For
each bolt hole, cut a sleeve long enough to touch the
keel and protrude through the floors inside the boat.
A lead keel is soft, so position nuts on the keel bolts
before casting it, just flush or slightly above the lead.
These will separate the keel and the hull. Slide the
pieces of threaded pipe over the keel bolts and firmly
fasten them with nuts. You may have to fabricate
temporary nuts that will pass through the holes in the
boat and hold the pipe firmly to the keel. Seal the
joint where the pipe meets the keel with thickened
epoxy. Then install the keel as described for bonded
keels. Lower the keel and saw off the excess pipe.
Install the keel using a good gasket material around
the keel bolt/pipe.
Bonding Through-Hull Fittings in Tubes
Rudder and propeller shafts, cockpit drains, and other
fittings often pass through the hull in tubes to protect
end-grain wood. These tubes must be watertight, and
they must bond well, but they are not always easy to
obtain. We solve the problem by building piping for
the through-hull fittings with WEST SYSTEM epoxy and
fiberglass. There are several ways to do this.
One very popular method is to find plastic tube or
metal rod of the right diameter and use it as a mold.
Make sure that the mold is clean and that it has no
nicks or scratches and coat it with paste auto wax or
another mold release.
Next, wet two layers of 4 oz (135 g/m2) woven fiber-
glass cloth with epoxy and wrap them around the
mold. Let the epoxy cure. Then, using a sharp knife,
slice through the fiberglass along the length of the tube.
Break the glass free of the mold, but for the moment
leave it in place. The cut is necessary because the mold
may not be perfectly round; without it, it might be very
difficult to remove the finished tube. Wet out more
glass cloth and wrap it around the tube until you reach
the desired thickness. Some epoxy may seep into the
cut, but this will not create any problems. Remove the
fiberglass tubing from the mold when the epoxy has
cured.
With a slightly modified technique, aluminum tubing
may also be used as a mold. Coat the aluminum with
heat-resistant mold release—Teflon™ spray is a good
choice—and wrap fiberglass cloth and epoxy around it
as before. Then heat the tube to about 120°F (49°C)
with a hair dryer or heat gun. Keep it warm until the
epoxy cures.
As the aluminum heats, both it and the wet-out fiberglass
will expand. When it cools, it will shrink to original
size, but the fiberglass/epoxy tube will remain slightly
larger. This makes it possible to remove the new tube.
If you have trouble sliding the glass from the mold,
try pulling it off with pliers.
A variation on this second method can be used to
make good-fitting, low-speed bearings. Mix WEST
SYSTEM epoxy with 406 Colloidal Silica or 423 Graphite
Powder and apply it to a Teflon-coated aluminum tube.
Heat the tube until the thickened epoxy is fairly hard.
Wet out fiberglass cloth with epoxy, wrap it around the
tube and the adhesive mixture, and allow it to cure.
Allow the part to cool and pull it off with pliers.
Chapter 14 – Hardware Bonding
149
Figure 14-26 Cross section of a removable bonded keel.
Keelson
Nut and washer set up on
head of keel bolt against
stainless steel pipe
Floor timber
Keel
Stainless steel
pipe threaded on
outside and set
in epoxy filled hole
Keel bolt
Nut set up on keel
bolt against stainless
steel pipe. Epoxy
thickened with
404/406 (silica) in
gap at top of keel
Lead ballast keel
Planking

--- PAGE 164 ---
150
Core Boatbuilding Techniques

--- PAGE 165 ---
Broadly, the coating and finishing techniques offered in this chapter have stood the test of time. Yet
wood/epoxy technology has evolved, and we’ve learned a great deal since the book was last revised.
Generally, our recommendations now are a bit more conservative than in earlier editions.
We now more strongly recommend applying multiple thin uniform coats of epoxy on a given day to
minimize trapped air bubbles, to have better control of coating thickness, and, in the end, to have more
epoxy on the surface because fewer sanding steps have been required.  We are less inclined to flocoat
flat panels with a single heavy coat of epoxy or recommend applying a single coat per day and sanding
before applying another coat.
We also now give more attention to preparing cured epoxy surfaces before recoating. We always recom-
mend washing with water and sanding cured epoxy coatings before recoating, whereas in previous
editions, we suggested that no surface preparation was necessary unless blush was observed on an
epoxy surface.
Because of concern over surface contaminants, we do not recommend using rags for applying solvents 
prior to applying epoxy. If solvents are applied at all, they should be applied with plain white paper towel.
Paints and varnishes in many cases have changed since earlier editions due to environmental concerns
over solvents. Waterborne coatings have gained popularity but still typically are not as durable as the
premium two-part polyurethane paints and clear coatings. If you are planning to use waterborne coatings,
be sure to do some testing to verify satisfactory results.
In Chapter 3, we explained the theory behind sealing
wood with WEST SYSTEM® epoxy. Here we provide
detailed practical instructions on applying epoxy
coatings and on finishing coated wood surfaces. We
like to keep boatbuilding simple, so in our shop we
continually try to make these necessary jobs as quick
and efficient as possible. We continue to modify and
improve our techniques and tools as we find better
ways to do things.
One of the best things about WEST SYSTEM epoxy is that
it’s easy to finish. A properly coated wood surface has a
hard, durable, stable, and moisture-resistant base for
painting and clear coating. Special finish preparations
are rarely necessary because most finish systems readily
adhere to epoxy-coated wood. Since the moisture
content of the wood beneath the final epoxy coating is
under control, paint and varnish tend to last longer.
In most roller and brush coating procedures, use the
standard application sequence which is detailed in this
chapter. Apply an initial coating of epoxy as evenly as
possible and let it cure. Lightly sand high spots, “fuzz”
and bumps until they are smooth, fill staple holes, and
apply a second coating. Proceed in this manner until
you have applied as many coatings of WEST SYSTEM
epoxy as you think necessary and prepare your surface
for final finishing. For protection against moisture and
moisture vapor, you should have at least two net coats
of epoxy remaining after sanding and finishing.
An alternate technique for coating with epoxy is
somewhat quicker than the standard roller-brush
Coating and Finishing
C H A P T E R
15
Figure 15-1 Coating the exterior of an IOR 1⁄2-ton racer. This
boat has a natural finish. All fairing, finish sanding, and coating
were done prior to removing the hull from the mold.

--- PAGE 166 ---
method but can be used only on flat or almost-flat
surface. Flocoating is particularly handy in areas where
you want to build up a thin coating of epoxy quickly.
General Coating Guidelines
Boat pieces and parts may be coated with WEST SYSTEM
epoxy at various times during construction. There are
no firm rules, so plan out what seems to be a conven-
ient schedule early in your project. Sometimes, especially
with exteriors, it’s a good idea to wait until the hull is
completely assembled and then to coat the entire struc-
ture at once. Usually, however, you can save a great deal
of time by coating individual interior components
before installing them. Precoating, as we call it, at the
workbench is much easier than coating and sanding in
difficult and awkward positions in a boat.
Consider labor savings when you think over the timing
of your coating. Finish work can be a surprisingly large
part of the total labor in a boat, as professional builders
are painfully aware, and any increase in efficiency is
worthwhile. When work is easier, it goes more quickly.
Gravity is against you when you coat and sand the
ceiling of a cabin roof after it is in position, and the
job can be strenuous. Epoxy will drip from overhead
surfaces and may create difficult cleanup problems. If
the same plywood surface is coated and sanded before
installation, you will save time and irritation, and you
will probably do better work.
Complete final fairing and shaping of all wood pieces
before applying an initial epoxy coating. Shaping and
fairing are very difficult after epoxy has been applied
because cured, epoxy-coated surfaces are many times
harder than bare wood.
Inspect the final shaped and faired wood surface to
check its moisture content. Ideally, the moisture content
should be between 8% and 12%. If its moisture level is
in the range of your wood’s saturation point, epoxy may
not penetrate enough to maintain grain strength.
Moisture content below 12% has little effect on epoxy
absorption, so unless its cells have been damaged in
overzealous kiln operations, wood that is too dry is
preferable to wood that is too damp. See Chapter 3 on
wood and moisture for more information.
If in doubt about the moisture content of a thin plank,
sand it with 80-grit paper. If you can’t produce a dusty
cutting, the wood is too wet. This trick does not work
with thick boards, which tend to dry out on the surface
while remaining green inside. Apply epoxy to wet or
damp wood only under emergency conditions when
there is no alternative.
Your wood should be clean and free of contamination
because oil, dirt, dust, and solvent residue will prevent
proper bonding. Remove oil and grease with a
degreaser/solvent—we’ve found that alcohol is very
effective—and sand your wood to eliminate the possi-
bility of solvent interference with epoxy adhesion.
Apply solvent with plain white paper towel instead of
rags to minimize the risk of surface contamination.
Fabric softeners and man-made fibers found in rags can
dissolve and contaminate the surface. 
The temperatures of your shop, wood, and epoxy are
important to the quality of a coating job. We find that a
range between 60° and 70°F (16° and 21°C) is best.
Both epoxy and wood should be at room temperature
or warmer before coating. At colder temperatures, the
viscosity of epoxy increases, and it becomes difficult to
apply. Warm epoxy, on the other hand, even when
applied to cold wood, will remain thin long enough to
easily penetrate. Warming the substrate and allowing it
to cool a little before coating also enhances epoxy
absorption. Warming both the epoxy and the wood is a
little more work, but worthwhile in cold conditions. You
may also, with slightly less satisfactory results, apply
cold epoxy to a cold surface and then heat both simul-
taneously with a hair dryer, heat gun, or light bulb.
Try to maintain constant temperatures as your epoxy
cures. If freshly-coated wood warms up—as, for
example, when cold wood is brought into a warm shop
or when coated plywood is taken from a cool shop into
hot sunlight—expanding air in the wood will form
bubbles on the coated surface. In the same way, if a
coated surface is taken from a warm shop to cure in
cold conditions, it may become cloudy or contami-
nated, especially by condensation.
Use unthickened WEST SYSTEM epoxy for both bonding
and coating. We suggest 205 Fast Hardener for general
152
Core Boatbuilding Techniques

--- PAGE 167 ---
coating operations at 70°F (21°C) or less and 206 Slow
Hardener in hotter weather. 209 Extra Slow Hardener is
available for general coating and bonding applications
in temperatures above 80°F (27°C). We recommend 
207 Special Coating Hardener for clear finish projects. 
It resists blush formation and is formulated for
maintaining clarity. Under normal conditions, you can
sand epoxy coatings in 24 to 48 hours after application,
depending on ambient temperature and hardener.  
Use epoxy without fillers or additives for most coating
jobs. When you need a mixture that will not run easily,
add small amounts of 406 Colloidal Silica. Don’t thin
WEST SYSTEM epoxy with solvents because doing this
may compromise the moisture resistance and physical
properties of the epoxy.
The most practical way to apply a WEST SYSTEM epoxy
coating usually is to roll it on with a high-density
urethane foam roller. After a good deal of experimenting,
we have settled on WEST SYSTEM 800 Roller Covers,
which have 1⁄8" thick foam on a stiff backing. Covers
with porous, low-density foam or with foam thickness
greater than 3⁄16" will add an undesirable amount of air
to epoxy during application and reduce control of
coating thickness. We therefore advise against using
them. Roller covers are inexpensive and almost impos-
sible to clean, so we always discard them after use.
We have weighed our roller covers before and after
using them and have found that they sometimes absorb
over 2 oz (60g) of epoxy. Two ounces can be a significant
waste factor in small jobs, so organize your work and
try to coat a number of components at one time with
one roller cover. Foam will deteriorate as epoxy begins
to cure because increasing epoxy viscosity causes
increased drag. To extend the life of your roller cover,
mix small batches of epoxy and roll your cover dry
before adding additional epoxy to your roller pan. Mix
about 4 oz (110g) of epoxy at a time and add more
small batches to it in the roller pan as needed.
There are many areas in a boat that can’t be reached
with a standard 7" (180mm) wide roller. One of our
solutions to this problem is to saw roller covers into
shorter widths and mount them on an adjustable 801
Roller Frame. In other tight situations, we use small,
cheap, bristle brushes for coating. For firmer action
and greater control, we usually cut the bristles on our
brushes short.
WEST SYSTEM epoxy is a dense material which requires
a good deal of roller pressure. This pressure, combined
with vigorous rolling action, leads to an even surface
coating over a large area, but it also often produces a
surface stipple of air bubbles. Remove this stipple
before the epoxy cures so that the surface is smooth;
sanding and finishing will be easier. Factory-made foam
brushes can be used to eliminate stipple, but they are
expensive and a little too flexible to be ideal.
We make our own, cheaper, brush-like foam tools from
WEST SYSTEM 800 Roller Covers. Cut a roller cover in
half crossways, and then slice each half longitudinally
into three pieces. These cuts will serve as brushing
edges, so they must be straight and clean. Make a
handle by sawing a slot in a stick and insert a segment
of roller into it, as shown in Figure 15-2.
We sometimes use bristle brushes to smooth out and
touch up epoxy coatings, although, as a rule, they are
not particularly effective for applying epoxy and they
cost a lot more than rollers. It’s hard to brush an even
and consistent coating over a large area and, once the job
is done, harder still to clean the brush. WEST SYSTEM
epoxy can be cleaned from bristles, but because epoxy
continues to cure even after drastic reduction with
thinners, this procedure is much more time-consuming
than standard paint cleaning. If you use brushes, store
them in a covered coffee can full of solvent.
Chapter 15 – Coating and Finishing
153
Figure 15-2 Cutting a roller cover into segments to make
foam brushes.
Wood handle
Saw slot
Roller segment

--- PAGE 168 ---
It may be possible to spray WEST SYSTEM epoxy, but 
we strongly recommend against it. Leaving aside the
practical difficulties—our epoxy is a high-density mat-
erial which is very difficult to atomize and reducing it
with thinners will lower its physical properties—the
possible health hazards are enormous. If a sensitized 
or potentially sensitized individual were to come into
contact with atomized epoxy, the health effects could 
be very serious. (See Chapter 10 Safety.)
Initial Coating with Epoxy
When you apply a first coat of WEST SYSTEM epoxy to
bare wood, it will penetrate the wood’s surface and
adhere to its cells, replacing air in voids and fissures.
The amount and depth of this penetration are affected
by several variables: the density of the wood, its grain
alignment, and its moisture content. The purpose of an
initial coating is to encapsulate the wood. Very deep
penetration is actually undesirable.
Wood density is the most important of the factors that
determine epoxy penetration. Cedar will absorb more
epoxy than mahogany. Grain alignment affects penetra-
tion because end grain absorbs much more epoxy than
flat grain. Grain runs exactly parallel to length in few
boards, and most have some run out, so it is very
common for epoxy to penetrate unevenly in a single
board. End grain is also a major avenue for moisture
absorption, so relatively deep epoxy penetration here 
is needed.
Individual wood cells are very resistant to all types of
liquids, including water, and are not easily penetrated
by any liquid unless they are submerged for long periods
of time. When you apply an initial coating of WEST
SYSTEM epoxy, it will penetrate the voids and fissures
between the cells and will travel only into cells that
have broken walls. This is what you want to happen. 
If the epoxy were to thoroughly saturate the wood, 
its weight and brittleness would increase faster than 
any benefits.
In most woods, in fact, epoxy absorption is desirable
only to the point at which wood grain strength is
reached. Whenever an epoxy-bonded joint breaks, 
the fracture should be in the wood rather than in the
bonding line. This is obviously important for bonded
joints, but it is just as important for coatings. If a coating
adheres so tenaciously that you only have to worry
about the integrity of the wood itself, you eliminate a
great deal of concern. It has long been considered almost
impossible to find a coating that adheres to a wood
surface in a difficult marine environment over a long
period of time. Polyester resins and most types of paint
have produced at best mediocre results.
A large percentage of the volume of a piece of wood is
air. If it cannot escape during coating to allow epoxy to
take its place, this air can be a major deterrent to good
penetration. When you apply the first coat of epoxy to
bare wood, you often see many small air bubbles on the
surface. These appear when the epoxy and the air
exchange places.
In most cases, this transfer occurs easily. Sometimes,
however, difficulties can develop. Air passage can be
restricted when cold, thick epoxy is applied in a heavier-
than-usual coating. In this situation, there appears to be
a standoff, with the air unable to pass from the voids
and the thicker epoxy unable to move in until the air
escapes. The obvious solution to this is to work in a
heated area, but if that is impossible, refer back to the
previously discussed guidelines.
During the initial coating process, recoat areas that look
dry as the epoxy penetrates, rolling on fresh epoxy as
necessary. End grain will soak up a great deal of epoxy.
Don’t apply too much in the first coating as an exces-
sive film can impede good air transfer. Instead, roll a
second coat over the first after a few minutes. Casually
inspect your surface for 15 minutes after applying an
adequate initial coat. Re-roll areas where excessive
penetration occurs.
Because wood grain expands as it absorbs epoxy, cured
initial coatings are often fuzzy and rough. Sand your
surface until it is smooth and dull before applying a
second coating of epoxy or a layer of fiberglass. Major
voids, staple holes, nicks, and dings can be filled after a
second or third coat, but we usually take care of them
after the initial coating so that the filled areas will be
covered with epoxy. After puttying these spots and
allowing them to cure, fair them smooth with
sandpaper on a block. Then you are ready to apply a
second overall coating.
154
Core Boatbuilding Techniques

--- PAGE 169 ---
Second and Subsequent Epoxy Coatings 
Use a foam roller to apply the second coat of WEST
SYSTEM epoxy. The important goal now is a smooth
coated surface, and for this you need long, vigorous
strokes. Roll the epoxy in several directions to maintain
as even a film as possible. If you inadvertently apply too
much epoxy to an area, it may run. Cold epoxy is diffi-
cult to apply in a uniform film, so use only warm epoxy
on second coatings. Use a brush to remove any air
bubbles or stipple, following the guidelines mentioned
earlier in this chapter.
Apply at least one penetration coat and one secondary
coat to every surface inside your boat. It is possible to
remove one or more coats of epoxy during sanding, so
areas which require a lot of abrading will require a
minimum of three coats of epoxy. You can apply more
coatings and they will provide greater resistance to the
elements, but generally you reach a point of diminishing
returns in both practical and economic effectiveness
with more than three net coats of WEST SYSTEM epoxy.
However, we do recommend applying up to six coats of
epoxy on surfaces that will be below the waterline on
boats that stay in the water for months or more at a time.
The smoother the surface coating, the less sanding you
will need for a really smooth finish for final painting. In
many cases, you can leave the second or third coating
as is in interiors and other areas which have no need of
a decorative coat of paint or varnish. Make provisions
for final finishing your exterior early, however.
Samples coated at our shop show a coverage rate of 
40 square feet per pound (8.2m2/kg) of applied mixed
epoxy. Since 2 oz (60g) of epoxy can be wasted in a roller
cover and some film may remain in a roller tray or
mixture pot, actual coverage may be reduced by up
to 25%. A fair average application rate for estimating
material costs and weights for initial and secondary
coatings WEST SYSTEM epoxy is 35 square feet per
pound (7.2m2/kg) of mixed epoxy.
WEST SYSTEM Pigments and Other Additives
Pigments and other specialized additives may be added
to the epoxy used in secondary and final coatings. Since
they may affect penetration, we advise against using
these materials in initial coatings. See Chapter 4 for
detailed information on these products.
WEST SYSTEM white and gray pigments cannot, of course,
be used on naturally finished hulls. However, if you plan
to paint your boat, they can be quite helpful. During
coating applications, pigments aid in maintaining visual
control of film thickness, and during sanding they can
prevent the removal of too much substrate. Pigmented
epoxy can also serve as a colored painting base, so
fewer coats of final finish are needed to cover a hull.
Both pigments and WEST SYSTEM 420 Aluminum
Powder provide protection from sunlight. Epoxy breaks
down under prolonged exposure to ultraviolet light; if
you do not plan to coat your hull with a finish system
immediately, add either pigment or powder to your last
Chapter 15 – Coating and Finishing
155
Figure 15-3  Building up epoxy coating on the deck of the
proa Slingshot. Note that the topsides and bottom have been
coated with gray pigmented epoxy.
Figure 15-4  Bottom of the proa Slingshot has been coated
with gray 420 Aluminum Powder pigmented epoxy and
sanded in preparation for painting.

--- PAGE 170 ---
coat of epoxy. This is a temporary measure which does
not replace a final paint finish. Aluminum powder is
more difficult to sand than pigment, so we suggest
using it only on areas that are already fair and smooth.
WEST SYSTEM 423 Graphite Powder is used in specific
areas in specialized coating applications. Graphite
powder/epoxy coatings are occasionally applied to
rudders, centerboards, and drysailed racers. They provide
low friction coatings with increased scuff resistance and
also provide UV protection.
Flocoat Procedures
As mentioned in the preface to this chapter, we are now
less inclined to flocoat panels than we were when the
book was first written. However, flocoating is one of the
most efficient ways to coat wood. If you use a flocoat,
you can achieve a very smooth surface with thickness
equivalent to at least three individual coatings in a
single operation. The disadvantage is that the technique
relies on epoxy’s tendency to level itself, so it only
works well on reasonably flat surfaces. Flocoating is
not effective on vertical surfaces or on inclines that are
so steep that the epoxy runs to a lower area.
We’ve gradually modified our flocoat technique and
now use several different procedures depending on
the desired weight of the part we’re working on.
To apply a flocoat, begin by spreading epoxy over your
plywood with a regular plastic squeegee. The coating
should be very light. Use only enough epoxy to wet out
the wood and allow for some initial penetration. You do
not want to build up a film.
About an hour after you have spread the first coat, pour
a large quantity of epoxy directly from your mixing pot
over your plywood surface. Use a serrated or notched
plastic spreader to distribute this epoxy as evenly as pos-
sible. The serrations on your tool will form little ridges
which will help control the thickness of your coating.
Next, immediately begin rolling your surface. Use light
pressure with your roller and stroke slowly in two
directions with a couple of passes each way. Check
again for an even surface and finish up by brushing
your flocoat smooth. Within 10 to 15 minutes, your
epoxy should self-level to a glass-like finish.
We usually sand the entire panel to desired finished
smoothness when the flocoat has cured. Then we cut
out whatever parts we need. In many cases, this
sanding is in preparation for final varnishing or
painting, which takes place only after the entire boat
is assembled.
Flocoating can work to save labor in some other, non-
flat areas, and it can also be used occasionally to level
off uneven surfaces. We have used the technique to coat
centerboards, rudders, deck areas, floorboards, and
cabin tops, but in many of these applications, we used
less epoxy than we might have had the surfaces been
perfectly flat. You can add low-density filler to epoxy
used for flocoating to make a mixture that runs less
than epoxy alone. Apply a flocoat of this fortified epoxy
to level off a panel.
We usually use a total of about 2 pounds (1kg) of
mixed WEST SYSTEM epoxy for flocoating one side of 
a single 4'  8' (1200mm  2400mm) sheet of
plywood. This amounts to approximately 1 ounce of
epoxy per square foot of surface area and includes the
epoxy used to initially penetrate the wood. Quantities
of mixed epoxy needed to apply the first coating will
vary somewhat even within a given species of wood, so
account for this variable factor by mixing a little less or
a little more epoxy as needed. For your first effort, try
mixing 6 to 8 oz (170g to 225g) of epoxy for the initial
coating.
Cleaning and Sanding Coated Surfaces
WEST SYSTEM epoxy will bond to cured WEST SYSTEM
epoxy-coated surfaces if the surface is properly prepared.
Sometimes a wax-like substance appears on cured
epoxy surfaces. This is an amine blush, a by-product
of the resin/hardener reaction. Blush is water-soluble
and it is good practice to wash it off with clean water
before sanding and before applying any further
coatings. The water wipe may not be practical on
wood surfaces coated with a single application of epoxy
or near bare wood because the wood is not completely
sealed. In this case, just sand the epoxy thoroughly
before recoating with epoxy.
You can also wet sand with waterproof sandpaper or
use a 3M ScotchBrite™ pad and water to remove blush
and abrade cured epoxy. Sand any remaining shiny
places dull before applying additional coatings. Left in
156
Core Boatbuilding Techniques

--- PAGE 171 ---
place, amine blush may clog sandpaper, and it may also
jeopardize adhesion. This residue may attract moisture,
which can also prevent proper adhesion of subsequent
coats of epoxy. Amine blush is most evident when a
coating cures in cooling temperatures, so maintaining
constant environmental controls as epoxy cures aids in
preventing its development.
In other situations, surfaces may be contaminated by
substances that are not water-soluble or by water itself.
To remove non-soluble materials, use an appropriate
cleaning solvent with white paper towel. In high hum-
idity, moisture may collect on a surface. This will act as a
contaminant and interfere with bonding between coatings.
Condensation may cause clouding in an epoxy coating.
When moisture is a problem, use 205 Fast Hardener
since this cures more quickly and has less “green” time
in which to collect moisture or use 207 Special Coating
Hardener, which is less affected by moisture. Try also
to maintain more constant temperatures. If for some
reason you are working outdoors in the rain, cover
freshly coated areas with a tent of plastic sheeting.
To eliminate any potential contamination problems
between coatings, it’s easiest to recoat while the
previous coat of epoxy is still “green.” This can be
anywhere from 1 to 3 hours after the earlier application,
depending on temperature and hardener. When the
epoxy begins to cure and becomes tacky, you can
immediately roll on another coat without having to
worry about running. Several coats of epoxy are possible
in a single day with only short intervals between them,
with no sagging. We have found that if you roll on the
epoxy and tip it with a brush or segment of foam roller
cover, air bubbles and roller stipple are eliminated.
Then the self-leveling ability of successive coatings is
sometimes as good as, if not better than, a single coating.
When you have applied the proper amount of epoxy,
your next step is to smooth the surface for painting or
varnishing. In many cases, especially in the interior,
you will have sa