r of the panel. This becomes the reference line for
all future measurements, and you can draw other longi-
tudinal reference lines parallel to it if necessary. (See
Figure 25-35.) Make measurements of the keel line and
sheer line using 1' to 2' (300mm to 600mm) intervals,
depending on the size and amount of curvature
involved. Closer measurement intervals, although they
involve more work, produce more accuracy. In areas of
rapid change such as might occur in the bow or
transom, you may want to reduce measuring intervals
down to as little as 4" (100mm) to achieve enough
accuracy. Transfer these measurements to a full size
plywood sheet that also uses a drawn centerline as a
main point of reference for all dimensions, with lines
drawn at right angles to the centerline at each predeter-
mined measurement point. Lay down the centerline
using a tight cable, just as is done in lofting, for the best
accuracy.
Chapter 25 – Compounded Plywood Construction
313
Figure 25-33  Marking waterlines and station lines on fold-up
models.
Figure 25-34 A model of the outriggers shown in Figure 25-27. This model has been marked with waterlines and section lines.
Section line
Waterline
Block
Marking on
waterline
Flat surface
Model secured plumb
and level on blocking

--- PAGE 328 ---
Carefully lift the measurements of the model panel
from the graph paper, using a divider with fine points.
Use great care and a sharp eye to interpret parts of
inches from the scale ruler. List the measurements in a
simple table under station positions for transfer to the
full-size plywood panel.
After you have transferred all measurements, use a
lofting batten to connect all the measurement points.
Because of the 1-to-12 scale-up, errors of plus or minus
1⁄8" are standard, with 1⁄4" to 3⁄8" errors not uncommon.
Using standard lofting techniques, try to pick the happy
median between the measurement dots. Continue to
adjust the lofting batten until it represents a fair curve
with minimal variation from the measurement points.
A 90° angle is a 90° angle, no matter the length of its
sides, so directly transfer the angles at which the panels
are joined on the model to full size. The keel is, however,
a different matter. It is the most difficult part of the
model to scale up, and accuracy here relies primarily
on the craftsmanship of the builder. The difference
between a 2" (50mm) wide keel and a 4" (100mm) wide
keel is very small on a model, but quite significant on a
finished hull.
The only other dimension to scale up is the deck
perimeter so that you can build a full-size deck jig. This
scale-up is not as critical as on the panel itself, and the
main concern is with overall fair curves in the lofting
batten rather than total accuracy on the deck width
where 1⁄4" (6mm) difference over, for example, 20"
(500mm) would mean little difference in hull perform-
ance.
Using Fiberglass Cloth on Compounded
Plywood Models
In the past few years, we have begun significantly
increasing the stiffness of some compounded hulls by
applying a layer of 4 oz or 6 oz (135g/m2 or 200g/m2)
fiberglass cloth to the outside of panels before folding
them. When 5-plywood is sheathed in glass cloth, the
fiberglass basically turns it into the equivalent of a 6-ply
panel.
Because these increases can be dramatic, this variation
on compounding occasionally causes problems. We
recommend that before attempting the procedure on an
entire hull, you experiment with a model and then, if
that bends successfully, that you test a 2'-long (600mm)
section of the plywood and glass schedule which you
plan to use, bending it to the hardest curves in the hull.
In areas of tight curves, folding is sometimes easier if
you moisten the inside of the plywood with warm
water.
314
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 25-35   Hull and deck panels for Victor T, offsets given in feet, inches and eighths of an inch.

--- PAGE 329 ---
Later Production Steps
Chapter 26
Interior Construction
Chapter 27
Deck Construction

--- PAGE 331 ---
This chapter discusses approaches and techniques for interior construction. Like the previous edition, it
also includes information on building tanks. While many successful tanks have been built using these
techniques, the regulatory environment has evolved over the last 30 years and has placed safety restric-
tions on various aspects of tank building, specifically potable water and gasoline tanks. Additionally,
gasoline formulations have changed and some can soften epoxy coatings over time. Because of this, our
recommendations on tanks have changed from earlier editions.
Boat interiors can range from the very simple to the
highly complex. Typically, large boats tend to have more
complete interiors than small boats, and cruising boats
have more highly developed interiors than racing boats.
It has been said that a boat with a perfect interior has
yet to be invented. The age-old problem of trying to
put a lot of accommodations into a limited amount of
space is a difficult design problem. We feel that boat
designers really earn their money when it comes to
interior planning and layout.
We are not interior design specialists, but we do have
definite thoughts on interior construction. Our
approach may be closer to the one used in aircraft
design than to traditional boat design in that we think
that the interior should be an integral part of the struc-
ture. Our approach may also offer designers more
flexibility in the use of space and materials. We’ve had
clear objectives as we have worked on interiors. Of
these, keeping weight to a minimum, using the interior
to improve the vessel structure, increasing interior
utility, and improving interior appearance have been the
most important.
Unfortunately, the joinery for most boat interiors will
require a significant portion of the labor hours needed
to build the boat. Professional builders are well aware
of this problem, and many a builder has learned the
hard way by underbidding this part of the boat. More
than any other aspect of the boat, interiors require
planning and strategy for the most efficient use of
materials and labor hours. Over the years, we have
developed a few simple techniques which have helped
to reduce the labor hours needed for interior work and,
at the same time, have made interiors more enjoyable
to work on. We present our suggestions here, but we
must also emphasize that every boat interior will
present its own unique construction problems. Careful
thought, common sense, and an open mind are all
needed to choose the best construction strategy.
Objectives for Interior Construction
Keeping interior weight to a minimum
On racing boats, the weight of interior amenities has
always been looked at with a critical eye. The added
weight of any interior, even on a heavy cruising boat,
should be carefully considered. Interiors are usually
non-structural or secondary structural items. They need
not be built with the safety margins required for the hull
and deck structure. Construction with our methods can
make interiors lighter. If you can save 200 or 500
pounds on a cruising boat’s interior, you can lessen the
vessel burden and increase its capacity to carry fuel,
water, or stores.
Using the interior to improve the vessel structure
With proper planning, it’s possible to install many
interior items so that they help to reinforce and support
the hull skin. When bunks, shelves, cabinets, and tables
are correctly bonded to a hull, they can contribute to its
strength and also add stiffness to the structure by holding
the hull skin in position in their immediate areas. This
is especially effective if the vessel is designed from the
start so that interior items are laid out to provide the
most support. The interior is no longer just dead weight
for the hull to carry around. Instead, it contributes to
the overall integrity of the vessel. By becoming struc-
tural, interior items at least partially pay for themselves
on a weight-to-strength basis.
Interior Construction
C H A P T E R
26

--- PAGE 332 ---
318
Later Production Steps
Increasing the utility of the interior
Unitized interior construction can minimize the upkeep
and maintenance of the interior and allow it to be kept
clean easily. Proper assembly and use of materials
maximize usable space. If, for example, you use fillets
instead of large cleats to attach interior items to a hull,
you can eliminate some room-consuming framework.
When all surfaces are smooth and glossy, cleanup is
easier. All of these increase the usefulness of the interior.
Improving interior appearance
When you use wood for boatbuilding, you can exploit
the variety of wood grains and colors for simple but
very attractive appointments. With wood, unlike other
materials, no part of the boat must be concealed under
headliners, ceilings, or other facades, although these are
sometimes desirable for covering frames, ribs, and
stringers. Effective use of various woods and combina-
tions of woods can produce beautiful results with
surprisingly little additional effort. We like naturally-
finished wood grain, but we do paint interior surfaces
when necessary for better contrast, to lighten a dark
interior, or to aid in cleanup.
Installing Interiors in Set-Ups
As we discussed in earlier chapters, portions of the
interior, including bulkheads, frames, and other structural
members, can be installed in set-ups for stringer-frame
and strip plank construction. Other interior items, such
as bunks, shelving, and counters, can also be built into
set-ups, and these too can become structural. Major
labor savings result from installing them at this stage
rather than when the boat is completed. During set-up,
you can work in an unencumbered position from the
floor with reasonably free access to all parts of the hull,
so fitting is often much easier.
One of the goals of this chapter is to identify the
options and complications that affect the choice of
methods used for interior construction. The amount of
interior that can be installed during set-up depends on
the complexity of the set-up itself. If you have many
dummy frames and supports, you may have so many
obstacles that it’s difficult to judge if you will save time
by installing the interior at this point or later. You will
obviously need a great deal of planning and ingenuity
from the beginning if you are going to install interior
items in the set-up. We suggest that you begin planning
during lofting, if not earlier.
To build interior items into a set-up, position them with
excess wood extending to or beyond the true hull
profile. Later, fair the excess in with the rest of the hull,
using a batten and hand planes as you would to fair
frames, stringers, and bulkheads. (See Chapter 18.)
Installing Interiors in Upside-Down Hulls
Work can begin on the interior and progress to a very
advanced stage while the hull is still upside down. We
Figure 26-1 Six bunks, a galley, and shelves bonded to the
interior of this hull skin contributed to a noticeably stiffer
structure.
Figure 26-2 Interior of the boat shown in Figure 26-1. Note
the teak sole with white pigment/epoxy seams.

--- PAGE 333 ---
Chapter 26 – Interior Construction
319
admit that there are some problems with installing
interiors in inverted hulls—such as learning to measure
upside down—but there are also many benefits.
First, work can continue on the exterior of the hull as
you build the interior. This is particularly efficient if you
have a large crew and are trying to finish the boat as
quickly as possible. When you work on the floor, you
have much more room than in an upright hull, so you
can use more people and machinery. Some upright
boats have only enough space for one or two people.
With these, working from the floor can allow two or
three people to move around and also make room for
machinery. Another benefit is that you can set up small
benches and machinery such as a band saw, disc
sander, and jointer inside the hull, and this saves labor.
When the hull is inverted, you can save time by
avoiding a lot of climbing. The average builder goes in
and out of his hull several dozen times in the course of
a day. With the hull upside down, you will only have to
duck under the sheer. You can also raise it 2' (600mm)
or more to make crawling in and out easier.
Another advantage of building the interior while the
hull is upside down is that work in progress is always
much cleaner. Shavings and sawdust drop to the shop
floor rather than into the bilge, so constant cleaning
isn’t required. If you are building a boat with minimal
shelter, an inverted hull can protect joinery, machinery,
and stock from the elements.
There are, however, some disadvantages to working in
an upside-down boat. Since good lighting is essential to
quality joinery, you will have to set up a lighting system
inside the hull, and this may be inferior to general shop
lighting. Overhead work tends to be tiresome and hard
on the arms. Finally, you may need platforms or
scaffolding to reach some portions of the interior.
Installing Interiors in Upright Hulls
As we have discussed, a major problem with the hull in
the upright position is getting in and out of it. You
should do anything you can to minimize this time-
consuming problem. We always try to keep the hull as
close to the floor as possible, installing all appendages,
such as keels and rudder, late in the construction
process. The difference of just 1' (300mm) in height
means that workers have 1' less to climb up and 1' less
to climb down each time they either enter or exit the
hull. With hundreds of trips, this saves many extra
hours.
Other steps can be taken to facilitate access to the hull.
With some boats, it’s possible to leave the transom open
so that workers will have easier access. Sometimes you
can erect scaffolding to create a substantial amount of
floor area at sheer height, and on this you can set up
handy tools and a bench. In our shop, we have a
second-story loft 8' (2.4m) above the floor. We adjust
the sheer height of hulls even with the loft and work
Figure 26-3  An IOR 1⁄2 ton racer. Bulkhead and partitions in
the set-up are mixed with temporary particleboard molds.
Figure 26-4 Interior construction in an upside-down hull of
an IOR 1⁄2 ton racer. Lighting and tools are set up in the hull.
Note the band saw in the background at the far right.

--- PAGE 334 ---
320
Later Production Steps
out of it. If a hull is large enough, you can set up a
workshop in the boat and do a lot of machining right at
the job site rather than outside of it.
Proper planning of your work limits the number of
trips you have to make in and out of the hull. By
carefully organizing the job immediately ahead, you can
gather the exact tools and the materials you will need.
It’s aggravating to have to crawl up and out of the hull
because you forgot your pencil or don’t have quite
enough clamps to complete a bonding operation.
Careful planning will help you avoid this. Pre-manufac-
ture materials to the greatest extent possible before you
carry them up inside the hull.
General Approach—Joinery
We rely on joints bonded with WEST SYSTEM® epoxy for
interior construction because they are often stronger
and easier to make than fastened joints. All interior
bonded joints must have adequate area for maximum
strength, so we engineer them with this in mind.
Although we often use clamps and weights to hold
parts in place as epoxy cures, we also use staple guns
with fine wire brads or narrow-crown staples. We inset
Figure 26-5 Interior of the IOR 1⁄2 ton after righting, before
completion of interior details and installation of hardware and
the engine.
Figure 26-6 The transom is left open for easy access to the
interior. Structural bunks are also airtight buoyancy tanks for
this lightweight laminated sloop.
Figure 26-7 Rogue Wave’s galley, pilot berth, navigation 
area, and daggerboard case. All interior joinery was installed
before the deck was built. Circular pads on the bulkhead 
are reinforcing gussets. Note the lift-out access ports in the
cabin sole. The unfinished teak cockpit sole is visible at the
lower left.
Figure 26-8  Rogue Wave’s galley area after the deck was
installed. Sandwich construction of the deck in this area
required a headliner skin. This smooth plywood panel was
painted white to lighten the naturally finished interior.

--- PAGE 335 ---
Chapter 26 – Interior Construction
321
these fasteners slightly and leave them in place; the
small holes they make are hard to detect after filling.
We often use fillet joints in interiors, especially where
curved surfaces meet. Fillets (described in detail in
Chapter 11) save a great deal of time and are strong for
their weight. Rounded fillets are also easy to keep clean. 
Plywood and wood parts can be bonded quickly to the
curved inner hull surface by positioning them and
applying a fillet of proper thickness on either side at the
intersection of the mating materials. The alternative to
filleting is to laboriously attach shaped wooden cleats to
the curved surface and to bond the parts to these cleats.
Figure 26-9 Design details for interior joinery. The basic designs are universal to boatbuilding, but modifications can be made
to lighten the structures without sacrificing strength because they are bonded. We usually use fillets and triangular cleats instead
of square stock for interior construction and get the same bonding area for less weight. It’s easy to form corner pieces for
settees, bulkheads, and other molded items over common objects such as pipes and barrels.
Settee front
Cushion rail
Plywood step with
protective hardwood
edge support
Plywood
cleats
1⁄8" saw kerfs filled with
thickened epoxy
Paper honeycomb
1⁄16" Birch plywood
1⁄2" Plywood
Frame
Trim
Plywood
Drop-in icebox top
Foam
Cushion
Bunkfront
Rail
Triangular cleat
Bulkhead
support
Settee or cockpit trim
Cleat
Bulkhead or
cabinet corner
Cap
Settee or bulkhead with laminated corner

--- PAGE 336 ---
322
Later Production Steps
Materials
We often use plywood for interior construction because
of its light weight and excellent strength and stiffness. It
takes much less time to cut parts from large plywood
panels than it does to piece them together from many
small pieces of sawn stock. Most of our interiors have
been built with 1⁄4" (6mm) to 1⁄2" (12mm) thick ply.
Except for bulkheads in larger boats, there is no reason
to use thicker panels; in many cases, 1⁄4" plywood will
work if it has adequate supporting framework. We have
also used much thinner plywood for making sandwich
panels with a honeycomb core.
Nowhere is the use of prefinished plywood more
important than in building interiors. The labor hour
savings alone are well worthwhile, and a much higher
quality finish is usually the added bonus. We have
found it beneficial to precoat whole sheets of plywood,
usually on both sides, rather than to prefinish
individual parts. (See Chapter 15.) You can coat large
panels more efficiently and save lots of time in sanding.
Smaller parts usually have to be hand sanded so as not
to sand through the coating around the edges, but you
can machine sand large panels very quickly. The disad-
vantage of prefinishing whole panels is some waste of
the prefinished panel. However, this must be weighed
against the labor savings. In some situations, it may be
best to cut out the parts first before prefinishing. In all
cases, however, you should attempt to prefinish the
parts prior to installation rather than coat and sand the
finished interior joinery after it has been installed.
When you are sawing parts out of plywood panels,
sawing can chip out the upper face of the plywood
edges, causing some unsightly scars which will show
up in a natural finish. Using a band saw minimizes the
chipping problem because it cuts downward and at a
higher rate of speed. The more commonly used saber
saw presents a problem. You can tape over the cutting
line with clear cellophane tape or scribe a line with a
sharp knife to minimize wood chipping. Using a sharp,
hollow-ground saber saw blade with no set is also
helpful. Generally, a precoated panel will not chip as
badly as an uncoated panel.
Measuring
Before moving a completed hull from the set-up, we
always mark a true waterline on its exterior and also, if
possible, at various places on the interior. (When using
the mold method, you might have to use a marked
sheer line as the reference line.) With a clearly marked
exterior waterline, you can turn the hull over and then
reposition it easily on its lines so that the interior layout
can begin.
Before you install any interior items, you must set the
hull on its lines in both the fore and aft and
athwartship dimensions so that proper measurements
can be made. This is true whether the hull is in the
upright or inverted position. With the hull plumb on
its lines, you can use the level as the major tool to
position interior layout dimensions accurately. With the
waterline position known on the inside of the hull, you
can measure all further interior dimensions either up or
down from this reference line. The only other dimen-
sion to determine is the fore and aft reference from the
station lines.
Making Templates
Fitting interior parts is one of the more difficult jobs of
boatbuilding. Besides the normal curves that must be
fitted to, a typical interior has numerous obstructions
such as bulkheads, keel, frames, and sheer clamps
which a part must be fitted around. The normal
complexity of this problem requires the use of
templates to define the final dimensions for a part most
efficiently. Trying to fit the part itself usually causes too
much waste of material.
If your boat was developed with computer-assisted
design (CAD) software, you may be able to have the
program produce templates for any given points along
the inside of the hull. Better still, a CNC router can be
used to cut the plywood to shape for you. The time
saved can be profound, so the method is worth investi-
gating. If you do not have these pattern-making devices
available, the information below will serve you well.
Any thin material that can be easily shaped is adequate
for template material. We regularly use scrap pieces of
plywood or veneer, which we temporarily fasten
together with staples to quickly fashion a rough
template that is as close to the desired final dimensions

--- PAGE 337 ---
Chapter 26 – Interior Construction
323
as possible. Initial mistakes in fitting are easily rectified
by making additions to the template or dismantling and
reassembling the template for another try.
Marking the template can be done with a compass or a
spiling block, as described in Figures 26-10, 26-11, and
26-17. Sometimes two separate markings may be
required to develop a close fit. After the first marking
and sawing, the template will fit close enough so that
the final marking and subsequent sawing will be much
more accurate. A hand-held block plane is the main
hand tool used to machine the template to a final—and
hopefully perfect—fit, but a spokeshave, offset chisel,
and file all end up being used at some point.
In some instances, a template may fit perfectly, with
only a few gaps. Correct these by stapling on another
piece of template stock to take up the gaps or measure
and mark the gaps on the pattern so that the differences
can be transferred to the actual part. When the template
is finished, position it on the stock for marking. Then
transfer the template measurements carefully, marking
them with accurate lines.
It’s easier to fit less complex parts right to the hull.
Direct fitting can be particularly effective if you use the
lofting as a guide for rough shaping parts before finally
fitting them. Some builders rely heavily on lofting and
cut interior parts so accurately that they need very little
final finishing.
It’s also possible to make many interior items outside
the boat, where work is much more efficient, and to
install them when they are finished. This can save 
a lot of time, but with more complicated parts, the
measuring problem can escalate and time savings are
reduced. As a general rule, it’s best to build interior
items that are easily fit to straight or gently curved
surfaces or those which stand free, such as tables,
outside the hull and then install them.
Figure 26-10 A template built up with scrap lumber and
plywood gussets.
Step 2 – Transferring marks to plywood
Figure 26-11 Two methods for transferring the hull shape
to a template and then to plywood.
Step 1 – Marking the template
Template formed out of scrap
plywood being used to spile
shape for bulkhead
Spiling
block
Gussets
Spiling or witness marks
Spiling block
Riser
Compass radius
noted on template
Use a compass
to swing 
arcs
Planking
Sheer clamp
Place the template on the plywood
stock from which the finished bulkhead
will be made. Reposition the spiling
block in its marks and scribe the
outside edge of the block (repre-
senting the inner surface of the
planking) on the bulkhead stock.
Plywood
stock
Take the pre-set compass and 
swing arcs from those marked on 
the template. The intersections 
of the arcs locate the 
inside surface of the planking.

--- PAGE 338 ---
324
Later Production Steps
Bulkheads and Partitions
Bulkheads are considered structural parts of the hull,
but in some boats, where they serve as partitions to
separate accommodations, they are also functional parts
of the interior. Because they usually contribute struc-
turally, bulkheads are often of very sound construction.
They are typically bonded to the hull in such a way as
to be able to transfer considerable load to the skin.
To become interior partitions, bulkheads need little
more than trim around exposed edges, as would appear
in the walk-through. Installing trim on these edges
improves their appearance and makes them safer than
sharp plywood. Generally, all cutouts in bulkheads have
rounded corners because sharp corners become points
of stress concentration. All cutouts in a bulkhead
theoretically have some weakening effect, so we often
rely on the trim to strengthen and stiffen the weakened
cutout area. Whenever we build what we consider
structural trim, we laminate curves and corners instead
of sawing them out of solid stock. We always scarf
joints in structural trim, although butt joints are more
standard with most trim.
To insure privacy, the designer may specify a door in
the bulkhead. With a small adjustment in the design of
the trim, you can incorporate an adequate door frame
system into the bulkhead opening. This only leaves the
difficulty of building a door to fit this opening and
frame system. The main problem with doors is that it is
difficult to get light ones that will stay perfectly flat. A
1⁄2" (12mm) plywood door, if it is perfectly flat to begin
with, will probably not stay that way forever. Like doors
that are constructed for houses, the most successful
doors for boats are laminated of two thinner sheets of
plywood with a core material in between. These doors
are light, strong, and very stable, with an excellent
chance of maintaining their original dimensions. (See
Chapter 11 for details on cored laminating procedure.)
Partition walls, such as those that might be used to
enclose a head, are generally non-structural. They need
only be strong enough to survive the rigors of hard
Figure 26-12  A major structural bulkhead for Golden Dazy is
constructed with a framework sandwiched between two 1⁄2"
(12mm) thick panels of utile plywood.
Figure 26-13  A bulkhead showing laminated hardwood trim
on the walk-through.
Figure 26-14 An opening in a structural bulkhead on Rogue
Wave. The daggerboard trunk to the right is bonded to this
bulkhead.

--- PAGE 339 ---
Chapter 26 – Interior Construction
325
sailing; in most situations, 3⁄8" (9mm) plywood is
adequate. We have successfully used 1⁄4" (6mm) ply,
sometimes including minor framing to improve overall
panel stiffness. For large partitions, you may choose to
use the core construction techniques outlined in
Chapter 11. Core construction saves weight and results
in stiff partitions with better sound-deadening quality
than possible with a single panel.
Cabin Sole (Floor)
The first part of the interior to be installed is the cabin
sole, or floor, which will be walked on. Plywood from
3⁄8" to 1⁄2" (9mm to 12mm) thick is generally used as the
floor base, with proper support framing underneath. To
achieve maximum headroom, most designers will strive
to get the floor as low as possible in the bilge. This
sometimes causes frustrating construction problems due
to lack of room. We have found that bonding a portion
Figure 26-17  Spiling the shape of a cockpit sole.
Figure 26-18 Installing cabin sole framework in Rogue Wave.
The structure supports the hull skin as well as the cabin sole.
Figure 26-16 A galley in a 30' (9.1m) trimaran with a
bulkhead forward and a hanging locker at lower right.
Figure 26-15 A section though a door showing the honey-
comb core and skins with two methods of bonding trim to 
the panel.
Jamb or stop
Jamb
After the plywood-honeycomb
panel has been laid up and cured, it
should be machined and trued. At
this point there are two methods
for bonding on the trim.
Trowel the thickened mixture
into the panel’s edge, filling
the open cavities of the paper
honeycomb along this edge. To
this clamp the oversize trim.
When everything has cured,
plane or rout the trim to suit.
After the panel has been cut
to shape, run it on edge over
the table saw. Set the saw
blade to cut out the core
around the edge without
damaging the plywood. Fit
and bond the hardwood trim
into this rabbet.
Rabbetted trim
Epoxy adhesive
mixture (low
density filler)
Plywood
Paper 
honeycomb
Use of a template to determine
shape of cockpit sole
Sheer clamp
Planking
Bulkhead
Spiling block
Brace to
prevent
racking
Notched to
fit around
bulkhead
Deck beams

--- PAGE 340 ---
326
Later Production Steps
of the floor permanently to the hull has helped locate
the floor as low as possible within the hull cavity. The
permanent floor also has great potential to contribute
structurally to the overall strength and stiffness of the
hull itself.
Obviously, portions of the floor must be removable to
afford complete access to the bilge. This accessibility is
important both for cleaning and for repairing any
damage that might occur. As a minimum guideline, you
should be able to reach every part of the bilge with
your hand when extending your arm through all avail-
able openings in the floor. With narrow, deep hulls,
only a small percentage of the floor needs be remov-
able. (See Figure 26-20.) Wide, flat hulls, however, may
require that a substantial portion of the floor be remov-
able to permit suitable access to the bilge.
We feel that floors should be complete and integral
enough to keep general debris out of the bilge. Not
only is refuse difficult to clean out of the bilge, but it
can do a marvelous job of clogging bilge pumps. This is
at best an aggravation, and at worst it is potentially
dangerous. The lift-out portions of the floor should fit
well with proper hold-down systems to keep them
snugly in place—this will facilitate keeping the floor
area clean. You should leave a minimum gap of 1⁄16"
(1mm) between all edges; for unusually large panels,
you should probably increase the gap.
The bilge is the area of the boat most prone to
dampness so give special attention to carefully coating
all bilge surfaces to insure maximum protection. We
further recommend that the bilge area always be clear
finished—never painted—so that you can easily detect
any moisture damage which might occur by noticing if
the wood turns dark. A successfully designed and
constructed boat should have dry bilges. The only way
for moisture or water to get down below should be
through open hatches or skylights, with wet sails, or
from people coming down from above. Like any other
part of the interior, bilges should be ventilated, utilizing
openings in areas that will allow air passage but not dirt
and debris into the bilge.
Icebox Construction
We have constructed many successful iceboxes using 1⁄4"
(6mm) plywood with light density closed cell urethane
foam as the insulation medium. Usually, we design the
inside of the icebox so that we will have the maximum
amount of icebox room for a given amount of interior
space, allowing for a minimum of 2" (50mm) of insula-
tion all around the exterior of the inner icebox. Two
inches of foam are adequate for most situations, but we
would advise against using any less. On occasion, we
have used up to 4" (100mm) of urethane foam insula-
tion to get maximum cooling performance.
Figure 26-19  Sections through the countertop and cockpit
sole showing core construction.
Figure 26-20 The forepeak cabin sole with lift-out sections.
Teak fiddle rail
Cap
Resin-impregnated 
honeycomp paper
Plywood panels
Teak veneer
Adhesive flow of the epoxy mixture forms
fillets up the walls of the paper honeycomb

--- PAGE 341 ---
Chapter 26 – Interior Construction
327
Begin by building the inner box. Since a major goal is
to build a box that has a rounded, smooth interior with
no difficult-to-clean sharp corners, we like to use large
low-density fillets on the inside corners to join side and
bottom panels. It’s most efficient to locate the opening
on the top of the box and try to make it as small as
practical for easy access. When the interior box is
finished, but before assembling its top, apply a
minimum of four coats of WEST SYSTEM epoxy to its
interior surfaces. We often add a layer of 6 oz (200g/m2)
fiberglass cloth to the interior for abrasion resistance.
Add white pigment to the final epoxy coatings to facili-
tate future cleaning: the white makes it easy to tell
when you’ve got the icebox clean. Sand thoroughly by
the third coat so that the final coat will be smooth.
When you have coated the box interior and the under-
side of the icebox top, attach the top.
Fit a neck around the perimeter of the top opening. This
should be at least as high above the box ceiling as the
thickness of the insulation you plan to use. To be sure
that you will have adequate bonding area, make the
neck from 1⁄2" (12mm) or thicker stock or plywood. Give
the exterior of the inner box a coating of epoxy and
allow it to become tacky before bonding precut pieces
of foam in place. Then use a thick mixture of epoxy and
low-density filler to carefully bond the insulation to all
exterior surfaces of the inner box, leaving only the top
opening uncovered. An adhesive mixture that is suffi-
ciently thick will act as contact cement, holding the foam
in place without clamps. If difficulties arise, use tape or
string to hold the foam in place.
When the interior box is finished, position it on a pre-
constructed base that will hold it at its proper height.
Bond the foam on the bottom of the inner box to this
base, using the same thick adhesive. Install front and
side panels around the foam perimeter. Although the
panels don’t have to touch the foam, it’s ideal if it works
out that they do.
If the icebox is located against the hull, leave a gap
between the foam and the planking and don’t try to fit
it snug. Doing it this way requires less fitting and is
therefore easier; having the foam tight against the hull
serves little structural purpose. Make the lid for the
icebox the same thickness of insulating foam as the base
and bond plywood as thick as that used on the inner
and outer boxes to its inner and outer surfaces. When
the lid fits, install a lip around the perimeter of the box
and add a handle to complete the job.
Tanks
The tank building methods described in this section
have been used with WEST SYSTEM epoxy since the early
1970s to successfully construct tanks for potable water,
sewage, gray water, ballast, diesel fuel, and a limited
number of gasoline tanks. Since then, the regulatory
environment and insurance considerations have evolved
and placed safety restrictions on various aspects of tank
building, specifically potable water and gasoline. Some
gasoline formulations available today soften epoxy. For
these reasons, we do not recommend building potable
water or gasoline tanks with WEST SYSTEM epoxy. WEST
SYSTEM epoxy continues to hold up well against diesel
fuel, sewage, and gray water.
Tank Regulations
U. S. Coast Guard (USCG) regulations, Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) regulations, American Boat &
Yacht Council (ABYC) standards, and insurance restric-
tions should be carefully considered by anyone,
professional and homebuilder alike, planning to build a
composite tank. Tank construction material and
construction processes have been investigated
thoroughly over the years, and the lowest grief option is
choosing a certified tank from a manufacturer. Certified
Figure 26-21 Cutaway of inner icebox construction.
Filleting on all plywood
joints to ease cleaning
Plywood box
Foam

--- PAGE 342 ---
328
Later Production Steps
fuel tanks have already been tested in accordance with
strict fire and flame regulations, and have proven
themselves in the field. Certified potable water tanks
are made to minimize or eliminate extractives.
While professional builders are bound by tough USCG
regulations and ABYC standards regarding tanks,
backyard boatbuilders have the option to follow or
disregard them. However, if the builder decides to sell
the boat, the federal regulations become applicable
because he or she has built the boat for the purposes of
sale. A good reference for individuals building boats for
their own use and not for sale is Safety Standards for
Backyard Boat Builders, COMDTPUB P16761 3B, avail-
able from USCG Headquarters or its web site. See the
sidebar for additional information.
Before using WEST SYSTEM products in tank construc-
tion, we advise that customers review the relevant
federal, state, and local safety regulations, standards,
and recommended marine practices, as well as contact
their insurance carriers for restrictions. As mentioned
previously, wood/epoxy diesel fuel tanks built with
WEST SYSTEM epoxy continue to perform well but may
be an uneconomical choice compared to an off-the-
shelf certified tank if insurance premiums increase or if
state licensing/federal documentation problems are
encountered. 
The ABYC publishes a written standard, Standard H-33-
Diesel Fuel Systems. We suggest you obtain a copy to
ensure all safety precautions and recommended
practices are followed. The USCG doesn’t publish any
regulations for recreational boat diesel fuel systems.
The tank building techniques to follow allow the most
efficient use of available space and typically produce a
tank that weighs less than similar capacity factory-built
tanks. The techniques are provided with the assump-
tion that you will do your homework and research the
various issues and concerns mentioned above. We
recommend that you limit their use to gray water,
sewage holding tank, and diesel fuel tank applications
unless you are able to locate certified coatings designed
to isolate and seal the inside of the tank from potable
water or gasoline. The contacts and references listed
should help you research your options.
American Boat & Yacht Council 
3069 Solomons Island Road 
Edgewater, MD 21037-1416 
phone: 410-956-1050 
fax: 410-956-2737 
info@abycinc.org 
www.abycinc.org 
Food and Drug Administration
5600 Fishers Lane 
Rockville, MD 20857-0001 
www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx_00/21cfr175_00.html 
Government Printing Office
Code of Federal Regulations
Superintendent of Documents 
Attn: New Orders 
PO Box 371954 
Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954 
Customer Service: 202-512-1803 
Internet access 
Fuel Tanks
www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx_00/33cfr183_00.html 
Marine Sanitation Devices:
www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx_00/33cfr159_00.html 
Fuel tanks for USCG Inspected Vessels (d GT)
www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx_00/46cfr182_00.html
West System Inc. 
PO Box 665 
Bay City, MI 48707-0908 
phone: 866-937-8797
fax: 989-684-1287 
www.westsystem.com  
NSF International 
PO Box 130140 
789 N. Dixboro Road 
Ann Arbor, MI 48113-0140 
phone: 734-769-8010 
toll free (USA): 800-NSF-MARK 
fax: 734-769-0109
www.nsf.org 
U.S. Coast Guard 
Commandant (G-OPB-3),
US Coast Guard, 
2100 Second Street, SW
Washington, DC 20593-0001 
phone: 202-267-0984 
USCG Infoline: 800-368-5647 
www.USCGBoating.org 
Recreational Boating Safety 
Safety Standards for Backyard Boat Builders, COMDTPUB P16761 3B
www.uscg.mil/d8/mso/louisville/WebStuff/comdtpubp16761_3b.pdf 
Figure 26-22 Sources of information on marine tank 
regulations (February 2005).

--- PAGE 343 ---
Chapter 26 – Interior Construction
329
Decisions on tank size and location should be made
early in the design process, especially if pre-built certi-
fied tanks are to be used. It is important to determine
tank size and location so that the hull will eventually
float on its intended lines. The tanks should be placed
where they will have the least impact on living space.
They should also be able to be removed at some point if
necessary. Selecting tanks early in the design process
allows you to build support around the tank rather than
trim away structure in an effort to fit a tank into an
existing space. If stringers or frames require cutting to
make room for a tank, take care to reinforce these
modified structural members to effectively carry load.
This can be done with sister frames, doublers, or fiber-
glass reinforcement.
Off-the-shelf certified tanks need to be properly
supported and secured so they do not move or upend
while in use. Improper installation can cause premature
tank failure. The best way to support a tank depends on
the material the tank is made of. Issues surrounding
installation of off-the-shelf tanks can be complex
because a method that works well for one tank type
may cause a potential problem for another. Because of
this, we recommend that you contact the tank manufac-
turer for their recommended installation technique.  
Some tanks require mounting on support pads. Others
require a flat surface for full contact. Expandable foam
is recommended by some tank manufacturers to
support tanks while others frown on the practice.
There are a variety of issues involved in securing tanks.
They include the following:
• Polyethylene and polypropylene tanks are flexible and
can swell while filled. Allowances must be made for
this.  
• Aluminum tanks are rigid and yet typically are not
strong enough to address stresses introduced in them
if rigidly installed in a hull that flexes. 
• Aluminum tanks are known for corroding between
their support pads and the bottom of the tank. This
deficiency can be addressed by protecting the bottom
of aluminum tanks and a couple of inches up the side
with several coats of WEST SYSTEM epoxy. This isolates
the aluminum from water that eventually finds its way
between the support pads and the bottom of the tank,
effectively extending the life of the tank. (For informa-
tion on preparing aluminum for bonding with epoxy,
see Chapter 14.)
When creating storage locations for tanks, it is good
practice to build a containment area around the tank to
isolate leaks should they occur. These areas should be
sealed with at least three coats of epoxy so the liquid
does not migrate into the wood or to other parts of 
the hull.
Support platforms for tanks can be created with
plywood and installed with epoxy fillets. Saddles can be
created with fiberglass cloth and epoxy, using the
bottom of the tank as a mold. These eventually get
glued into position in the boat to support the tank in an
exact location. Rubber pads are often used between the
bottom of a tank and its support structure to minimize
potential chaffing. Hold down straps and fittings, avail-
able from the tank manufacturer, can be used to secure
the tank to the platform/saddle. The hold down scheme
used to secure tanks should be robust. We recommend
using glued-in fasteners and hardware bonding
techniques described in Chapter 14. Hardware bonding
will maximize the holding power of the screws involved
and seal out possible moisture intrusion that could
significantly weaken the holding power of the fastener.
Tank Construction
Holding tanks made with plywood and WEST SYSTEM
epoxy have been extremely successful, mainly because
they are inexpensive and easy to build. You can build
tanks to the exact size and shape you need and elimi-
nate the time and expense of preparing drawings for a
metal tank fabricator. While there are arguments in
favor of building tanks permanently into the hull, we
always make them as separate, usually removable, units
so that if the hull is damaged, we can remove the tank
to repair it.
The procedure for constructing the interior of a tank is
similar to that used for the interior of an icebox, except
that you can use cleats on the exterior corners to
assemble the plywood panels if desired. Venting is
needed to prevent buildup of gas pressure. Baffless
should be installed to reduce the surge effect that can
otherwise occur and to support the structure. If you use
them, the number and size of baffles are proportionate

--- PAGE 344 ---
330
Later Production Steps
to the size of the tank. A typical 40-gallon (150 liter)
tank might have two or three baffles about three-fifths
the size of the interior section area.
Build the tank in two halves: the main box (with or
without baffles) and the top. To maximize space, you
can mold curved side panels that conform to the
contour of the hull out of sheets of plywood or veneer,
and then assemble them with standard sheet ply to
complete the tank. Depending on the size, shape, and
amount of support provided, 1⁄4" (6mm) plywood is
probably strong enough for most tanks up to 40
gallons. Thickness of plywood for tanks is mainly deter-
mined by weight-per-square foot of unsupported area.
Supports for a 1⁄4" tank should be no more than 12"
(300mm) apart, assuming loading of 30 pounds per
square foot.
Holding tanks do need occasional cleaning, so we
always include a removable port in the middle to
provide access to all parts of the tank. Apply a layer of
6 oz (200g/m2) fiberglass cloth to the interior and apply
5 to 6 coats of epoxy to provide an excellent moisture
barrier. Try to make the interior surface as smooth as
possible to facilitate cleaning.
Windows and Ports
Windows provide light and, in many cases, much of
the ventilation needed in the interior. Ports or windows
which open yet can be made watertight are very diffi-
cult to make yourself. The price of the manufactured
ones is reasonable, so it is best to purchase these items.
Traditionally, ports have been made of bronze or
aluminum, but in recent years a number of excellent
plastic windows have been introduced on the market.
Some of these plastic ports have unique design features,
and we have installed them on the most expensive boats.
You can easily manufacture and install at low cost non-
opening windows which only let in light. You can use
standard Plexiglas™, but we highly recommend the use
of Lexan™ because it is harder, has better scratch
resistance, and is much stronger than Plexiglas. Choose
a type and thickness of window comparable in strength
to the cabin side or hull area that it is replacing.
To install windows as shown at the top of Figure 26-25,
drill and countersink holes and screw or bolt the Lexan
or Plexiglas to the cabin wall. You can install the
window on either the exterior or the interior surface.
We generally prefer the interior because the windows
look better, but interior installation is potentially
weaker and the cabin wall must be thick enough to
Figure 26-24 A diesel fuel tank on Rogue Wave. The cockpit
sole forms the top.
Figure 26-23  A 40-gallon (150 liter) tank for Rogue Wave,
constructed using fillets and fiberglass tape on all inside
joints. The top of this tank forms a part of the cabin sole and
the tank is removable. Baffles are scalloped on the upper edge
so each compartment will vent. Notches at the bottom of the
scallops are for 3⁄8" (9mm) thick longitudinal plywood frames
to support the top.

--- PAGE 345 ---
Chapter 26 – Interior Construction
331
provide holding power for fasteners. If it isn’t thick
enough, the area around the edge of the window will
have to be built up with more wood in the immediate
area of the fasteners.
Plastic glass comes with stick-on protective paper. Leave
this paper in place to protect the plastic until the
window is installed. Mark the window on the plastic—
you want the window to overlap the cabin side by
about 1" (25mm) —and cut it with a band saw or saber
saw, file edges smooth, and radius the exterior corners.
Drill fastener holes and fit the window in place. Just
before you install it, peel off the paper from part of the
plastic that overlaps the cabin. Rough up this area of
the window with sandpaper and bed the window in
position with silicone sealant, carefully removing any
excess. Insert self-tapping screws or machine screws if
through bolting is desired. Adjust the number of
fasteners used to the anticipated severity of loadings. If
you are going offshore, the joint between the window
and the cabin wall should be as strong as the cabin
wall. You can remove the paper on the window if you
need light below, but it’s sometimes better to peel it off
after you have painted the interior.
Another way to install windows, also shown in Figure
26-25, is to bed them in silicone sealant as described
above, but to finish them off in plywood frames which
are bonded to the cabin sides. This is a little more diffi-
cult, but framed-in windows are more attractive than
screwed-in windows, and this method is particularly
effective for installing windows on thin cabin walls.
Frames may be attached inside or outside, but we
prefer to use them to enhance interior beauty. Wherever
Figure 26-26 Low-cost lift-out window.
Figure 26-25 Non-opening windows.
Lexan™ window bedded in silicon sealant
and screwed directly to cabin side.
Lexan window set in
plywood frame glued
to cabin side.
Lexan
Cabin side
Frame
Fashion the hardwood handle to a
smaller radius than the cabin side so
that the top of the finished window
presses out against the cabin side as
the window slides down into the frame.
Window opening
Cabin side
Hardwood handle
Lexan™ or Plexiglas™ window
Limber holes
Plywood cabin side
Frame
Section AA
Section AA

--- PAGE 346 ---
332
Later Production Steps
they are, the frames should have enough bonding area
to ensure a strong window joint. Another type of
window is a “poor man’s” lift-out window. This will
keep out rainwater, but may not keep out water if the
window is hit with a solid sea. This type of window is
particularly successful on lightweight boats which,
because of their lightness, are not normally subjected to
being boarded by large waves. Outline the cutout in the
cabin wall on three sides with a trapezoidal framework,
which goes across the bottom and up two sides of the
window, staying an 1" to 2" (25mm to 50mm) away
from any part of the opening. Deeply groove this frame-
work so that any water entering will run down the
groove to drains which are drilled through the cabin
wall to the very base corners of the framework. Then
cut out a glass window of the same trapezoidal shape as
the framework, fit it into place, and install a lifting
handle on the uppermost part. To lift out the window,
move it up approximately an inch or two and set it
aside. You can then replace the window with a framed
screen the same size to keep out bugs.
Electrical and Plumbing Systems
To do the best job on your boat’s electrical system, it is
wise to plan a wiring diagram before installing the
interior. This is especially important if you plan on
extensive use of modern electrical items. Plan the
location of all lights, instruments, radio, pumps, refrig-
eration, and engine. With these items located in the
interior plan, lay out the best wiring routes. Then, as
you construct the interior, make provisions for the
wiring, such as pre-drilling holes in interior parts before
they are assembled.
Most electrical wiring can be nicely concealed from
view but still be accessible for maintenance. You can
hide wiring behind deck beams, in back of shelf fronts,
and under bunks. Situate the master control panel in a
central location which both minimizes the amount of
wire needed and provides the best routes for hiding the
wiring. Sometimes, it just isn’t possible to hide all of the
wiring, and you have to take other measures to cover it
for a pleasing appearance. In these cases, make up U-
sectioned coving from pieces of wood and install it over
the wires with screws so that you can remove the
coving easily. You can use more exotic contrasting
woods to make the coving, adding beauty to the
interior with little extra weight.
In a wood boat, you can easily attach wiring to any part
of the interior using various types of commercial staples
or available wire mounts. Wood is also a natural
insulator, and the wiring does not have to be shielded
from the possibility of shorting out, as it does in steel
and aluminum boats.
There are many pitfalls in a marine electrical system,
and we suggest that you familiarize yourself with at
least one good book on the subject, especially if your
electrical system is to be extensive. One excellent text is
Boatowner’s Mechanical and Electrical Manual by Nigel
Calder.
In most boats, plumbing systems are rather basic and
easy to install. We advise that you lay out your systems
well beforehand to minimize the amount of piping
needed. For example, install the water tank close to the
sink and the holding tank next to the toilet. All
through-hull fittings are potential dangers to your boat,
and we recommend that you buy only the best fittings
(with shutoff valves) and install them properly. Design
your interior items around your plumbing require-
ments. This is especially important with the engine if it
is to be walled off or covered with an engine box. Allow
room for the water intake, water exhaust, muffler
system, fuel tanks, and feeder lines.
Interior Final Finishing
We have always been enthusiastic about natural wood
finishes. Some people criticize wood interiors for being
too dark and maintain that the only way they can be
brightened is with the use of light-colored paint. For
the most part, we feel that this objection can be
overcome by using light-colored woods. Spruce,
Okoume, and pine all finish light and are also beautiful
in grain. Our general observation is that light woods
occur in nature more commonly than do the darker
woods. The widespread use of stains is also responsible
for wood’s reputation as being dark.
This is not to say that we are against using solid colors
on interiors. The tasteful use of color in the right places
can accentuate natural wood grain finish and, at the
same time, help to brighten an interior. Finishing

--- PAGE 347 ---
Chapter 26 – Interior Construction
333
countertops and tables with a light-colored plastic
laminate (easily bonded to wood with WEST SYSTEM
epoxy) results in a durable, easily maintained working
surface. Solid surface laminates like Wilsonart™ and
Corian™ can also be glued to plywood with WEST
SYSTEM epoxy.  Just be sure to abrade the bond side with
80-grit sandpaper prior to gluing in place. 
Painting the under-deck ceiling and bulkheads with
light colors provides good light reflection. Choosing
light-colored materials for cushions and curtains also
brightens an interior.
Generally, it is thought that a varnished natural surface
requires a lot of extra time, but many professional
builders believe that the naturally finished interior is
more attractive for the same amount of work than the
painted interior. A solid color, especially with high-gloss
paint, will magnify imperfections in the surface. The
same small imperfections in a varnished surface are
camouflaged by the natural wood grain.
As we have already discussed, with our method of
construction, nowhere is prefinishing more important
than on interior items. It’s the same old story: coating
and sanding of intricate parts is much more efficiently
done outside the boat at a comfortable bench rather
than inside in cramped conditions. Not only are fewer
labor hours needed, but a much better finishing job is
possible.
To install the individual interior parts, carefully
machine, assemble, and hold them in position until all
epoxy cures. Be careful to remove any excess epoxy
from joints during assembly, while it is still liquid or
semi-solid, to prevent a lot of difficult sanding and
grinding later on. Fillets are normally installed during
assembly. Try to make yours as neat and clean as
possible, removing all excess material and smoothing
fillets with a final pass of a filleting stick. If you haven’t
had a lot of experience with fillets, practice on some
corner joints to improve your craftsmanship. To modify
fillet color to match the interior of the hull, experiment
with combinations of low-density filler and 405
Filleting Blend. You can further adjust fillet color by
adding pigment or tempera paint to the epoxy.
When the fillets are fully cured, sand them to remove
shine and recoat with epoxy. At the same time, fill any
staple holes or other depressions. A 406/epoxy mixture
makes the best filler for small holes in a natural finish
and can be toned for color by adding small amounts of
sanding dust from the wood species you are attempting
to match. The only caution is that this material is
extremely hard and difficult to sand when cured, so
carefully clean away all excess.
When you have completed the interior and installed the
trim, inspect all surfaces in preparation for varnishing
or painting. Sand the coated fillets as well as any areas
which you have filled or coated, such as staple holes,
dings, or scratches. There may be areas in the interior
where you would find it difficult to use precoated parts
because of their unusual shapes. You will need to coat
and sand these items when completed, using the
standard coating sequence. The degree of fineness you
choose in your interior sanding is a matter of taste.
Professionally, for a varnish base, we go down to 220-grit
paper when hand sanding (either wet or dry). With
machine sanding, we use 150-grit paper (and sometimes
even 120-grit paper). For solid colors to look good,
especially high-gloss urethane, finer sanding may be
needed.
Figure 26-27 Prefinished interior on an IOR 1⁄2 ton racer.

--- PAGE 348 ---
334
Later Production Steps
When the interior preparation is completed, you will
have the major job of cleaning up in preparation for the
final finish coating. Begin this task by vacuuming all
excess dust, dirt, and debris out of the interior. We use
a small portable shop vacuum with standard attach-
ments. Next, wipe down the entire interior, using soft,
absorbent rags with a large pail of clean, warm water,
rinsing the rag as you go. Make several trips around the
interior surfaces, changing the water several times
during the process. When the entire surface is as clean
as possible, let it dry and then wipe it with solvent and
plain white paper towels to remove any latent dust or
contaminants which might remain on the surface. The
final step is to wipe all surfaces with a tack rag.
Painting and Varnishing Interiors
The interiors of boats are much more difficult to
varnish or paint than are the exteriors. The reason is
very simple. There are many protruding items such as
bulkheads, beams, and frames that you must paint
around as well as furniture that may need coating in
difficult areas and on several surfaces. Complicating the
process are items which should not be painted, such as
windows, prefinished countertops, and various
hardware items. If you are an experienced and accurate
painter, you can avoid these items. If not, we recom-
mend that you cover and tape off these surfaces so that
you do not inadvertently slop paint on them. (Note:
From here on, we use the words “painting” and
“varnishing” interchangeably.)
Generally, we break up the painting job into two or
more stages because the average interior requires more
hours to paint than one or even two persons can expect
to do at one time. For a 30' (9m) boat, it is not unrea-
sonable to plan for 20 hours of interior painting—too
much for even two people in one work session. Usually
there are natural break points within the interior where
you can start and finish a job without causing any
unsightly overlaps. You can successfully paint the floor
area, certain items of interior furniture, and the ceiling
apart from the rest of the interior. Mentally surveying
the job beforehand and trying to identify the amount of
work you can do at one time is important. If you get
tired from painting too long, the quality of your work
will go down and all of the many hours of surface
preparation will not pay off as they should. At all times
during the painting, you will want to make yourself as
comfortable as possible. This means proper ventilation,
a reasonably cool temperature, and good lighting.
We assume that you have designed a good lighting
system to perform other interior work, but be aware
that final painting requires “super” lighting to prevent
missing areas and also to gauge the amount of coating
you are applying in a given area. Too little coating
material will cause dry spots that will not have as much
gloss as the rest of the coating. Too much coating will
develop runs. You need to check your coating applica-
tion continually, and this demands enough light. One
answer is the use of a portable lamp in conjunction
with the general lighting system. You can carry the lamp
with you to shine on the work immediately at hand.
We use high-gloss varnishes and paints for interiors
mainly because they reflect light and make it easier to
light these areas. As we mentioned earlier, glossy finish
paints show more defects than semi-gloss or dull
paints. Dull paints have their own disadvantages: they
are usually porous and difficult to clean, and they
always seem to be unsightly. Glossy paints, by contrast,
are easy to clean and, if protected from sunlight, will
keep their gloss for many years and rarely need
repainting. Because naturally finished interiors are
generally protected from the sun, a high-quality spar
varnish with an ultraviolet filter is unnecessary. Instead,
Figure 26-28  A clean, well finished interior built with WEST
SYSTEM epoxy.

--- PAGE 349 ---
Chapter 26 – Interior Construction
335
choose a varnish that is easy to apply and which dries
to a high gloss.
As we discussed in Chapter 15, experience with a
specific product is perhaps the largest single factor in a
successful paint job. If you have used one system many
times, you will be able to predict its reactions to temp-
erature and humidity. Always test a new product in an
inconspicuous spot to be sure that it is compatible with
the cured WEST SYSTEM epoxy surface. To gain experi-
ence with any paint or varnish, begin by coating the
forepeak, under bunks, and other inconspicuous areas.
Sponge rollers deposit the right amount of coating faster
and better than brushes, so use them for painting and
varnishing whenever you can. Cut roller covers in half
to reach nooks, crannies, and broken surface areas more
easily. As you roll on a coat, go over the surface with a
high-quality brush to smooth it and remove any air
bubbles. It’s important to do this as soon as possible
after rolling the paint on so that it will flow naturally
and produce the smoothest surface. Use a brush to
paint areas you cannot reach with the roller.
Painting with a brush is a skill which must be learned.
The object, of course, is to get the proper amount of
coating onto the surface and smooth it out so that it
will self-level and produce an even, fine-textured
coating over all surfaces. This is most easily done on a
flat surface. The inside and outside corners of stringers,
frames, and other obstacles present coating problems
which you must overcome. Corners become natural
collection points for excess paint and are a major source
of paint runs.
A good brush is of primary importance. We advise
investing in a good badger hair or fine bristle brush.
There has been some success with foam brushes, and in
some cases they appear superior in controlling coating
thickness. However, they also seem to have a short life
span, doing a good job at first but getting progressively
worse as the foam begins to break down.
It often seems impossible to control dust as you varnish,
but you can take steps to minimize the problem. First,
do everything you can to remove all dust and dirt from
the interior before you begin varnishing. Do not let
anyone else perform any operations that might create
dust in the shop as you work. We go so far as to spray
water on the floor around the boat. If the exterior of the
boat is still dirty, cleaning the interior isn’t going to help
much—if you sit down on the dusty exterior, the back
of your pants will be contaminated and you’ll carry dust
down into the interior. This will also happen with shoes
and anything else that becomes contaminated before
going into the interior.
Just before coating an area, give it a final wipe with the
tack rag. Keep the rag in your shirt pocket at all times.
As you paint, you may discover contaminated spots.
Stop and remove them before varnishing because
contamination will both spoil the paint or varnish in its
immediate area and affect the brush and coating
material. Enough dust and dirt will give your finish a
“non-skid” effect.
Time is important when you apply varnish. After rolling
it on, you may have a very short period in which to
play with a coating before it loses its solvents and starts
to dry. Drying times vary, as do application conditions.
In hot weather some paints will only give you a few
minutes for corrections; others will provide 15 to 20
minutes of grace for touch-ups. Since it will give you
more time in which to fill in places you’ve missed and
to fix runs, we advise varnishing in cooler temperatures
and the use of slower-drying coatings.
In all cases, we recommend following the coating
manufacturer’s instructions. If you are in doubt as to
whether a given coating will work over an epoxy base,
test the coating on an epoxy-coated piece of scrap
lumber or in an inconspicuous area of the boat.

--- PAGE 350 ---
336
Later Production Steps

--- PAGE 351 ---
When Gougeon Brothers on Boat Construction was first published in 1979, the information concerning
deck framing and construction reflected the basics of traditional deck construction but also introduced
revolutionary procedures for light weight, high-strength deck structures. These new procedures for
constructing deck framework and using plywood instead of planking as a decking material have proved to
be highly successful both in meeting the structural demands of high-performance racing sailboats and in
long-term use.
We have changed some recommendations for applying teak veneer decks in this edition. Using plywood
for the major deck thickness to save weight and cost and then adding a teak veneer has produced excel-
lent results. However, in earlier editions, we recommended using 1⁄8"-thick (3mm) teak set in epoxy and
stapled in place until the epoxy cured hard. The staples were left in place until the final sanding, which
ground away the crown of the staple but left the legs buried in the teak.  With repeated wetting and drying
cycles, the staple legs worked up and extended above the deck. To eliminate this problem, we began
using temporary screws in the seams instead of staples. This has worked well and is the procedure
described here. Once the screws are removed, the deck has no fasteners to work loose or to cause leaks. 
We also now feel that thicker teak veneers can be used—up to 1⁄4" (6mm)—to provide a longer service life.
This edition also recommends using 404 High-Density Filler to thicken the epoxy used to fill the seams
when applying teak veneer. This filler does not trap many air bubbles, resulting in a seam that has very few
pinholes or air bubbles exposed after sanding.
The earliest seagoing boats were built without decks,
and as late as the thirteenth century, the Vikings were
plying the seas in their open longboats with crew and
cargo exposed to the elements. During this period,
however, the deck started to become a common
addition to oceangoing vessels and for very good
reasons. The use of the deck improves the vessel in
three areas:
1. Decks keep water out of the hull, making it more
seaworthy and protecting its contents and crew from
the ravages of the weather. A canvas cover might
serve to keep out rainwater, but it would never be
adequate if the boat were boarded by huge seas. In
certain types of boats, the deck must be as strong as
the hull in order to withstand the surge of thousands
of gallons of water pouring on to it at one time.
2. Decks provide a working platform for carrying out
operations of the vessel. Deck design and layout can
be crucial to crew safety and efficiency when handling
the vessel, especially under adverse conditions.
3. Decks improve the structural integrity of the boat. 
A hull with no deck is usually very wobbly because
there is nothing to support the upper sheer areas.
The same hull with a deck installed becomes an
amazingly rigid structure with great resistance to
twisting or torsional loads.
The deck can also serve other structural functions.
Modern masthead rigs rely on a taut forestay to allow a
good set on their large foresails. To maintain a taut
forestay, a great deal of pre-tensioning must be done on
either the backstay or forestay. This generates forces
that tend to bend the boat in an arc, causing the ends
to raise up toward the mast. A properly engineered and
constructed deck system can resist the high compres-
sion loads and thus prevent most of this hull
deformation.
The deck must also be capable of withstanding high
point loading wherever it occurs. Winches, cleats, and
other deck hardware can generate enormous strains
which the deck must be capable of bearing.
Deck Construction
C H A P T E R
27

--- PAGE 352 ---
Preparing the Hull for Deck Installation
Before work begins on the deck, make sure that all
items that you can practically install in the interior are
completed. This includes the engine, tanks, plumbing,
some electrical fittings, and any interior furniture items.
Once you have installed the deck, interior work will be
more difficult because of the restricted access and lack
of good lighting.
Take measures to protect these installed interior items
from general physical abuse that might occur during
deck construction. Cover areas that could suffer from
dripping adhesive by taping polyethylene film in place.
Cover areas that could be walked or stepped on with
cardboard cut to size. Tape it down to hold it in position.
The first stage of preparing the hull for the deck is to
plane the sheer close to its final desired dimension. We
assume that you have marked your sheer line carefully,
but, in many cases, the sheer measurements may be
replaced by the sheer clamp itself, the actual measure-
ments having been obliterated in the process. If the
sheer line you developed in the lofting and later in the
set-up was fair, you probably will have little trouble
final fairing the sheer to a high degree of exactness
using the installed sheer clamp itself as the only guide.
Because the sheer line is such a prominent dimension,
defining the hull and deck intersection, it is more
noticeable than any other dimension of the boat. If it is
wavy or humpy, it can easily destroy the looks of an
otherwise beautiful boat. Make every effort to get this
critical part of the boat as fair as possible.
Fairing the Sheer
As you are planing the sheer line, you will want to
begin developing the proper bevel on the sheer clamp
for intersecting the deck. You can determine the angle
at which the deck meets with the sheer clamp at each
station from the lofting, but it is not really critical to
achieve the exact bevel at this stage. Get the bevel
reasonably close, leaving it a little on the high side.
Later, when the deck profile is better defined with some
of the deck framework installed, you can easily final fair
and bevel the sheer clamp angle. It is important at this
early stage, however, that you accurately determine the
final sheer line because it is the main reference point for
measuring. All future deck measurements used for
installing the deck framing, cockpits, and cabins are
taken from the sheer line.
From the side view, sheers are usually relatively straight
lines. Even a heavily curved sheer is not likely to curve
more than a foot over the entire length of the boat. For
this reason, a hand plane with an exceptionally long
bed or sole makes the job of fairing the sheer line a lot
easier. The long bed of the plane quickly detects humps
and hollows over a reasonably long range. There is,
however, a limit to what any plane can do. You must
still determine the overall longitudinal fairness of the
sheer by eye. Sheer line fairness is easiest to sight on
narrow hulls where there is minimum top view curve in
the sheer profile. Wide hulls present the biggest problem
because there is no way to sight down the sheer and see
all of it in the same sighting. The only way to view all
of the sheer is to step back until you can see the whole
hull from the side, but from this angle a slight variation
is difficult to detect. Usually, the side view, together
with careful observations of portions of the sheer from
both directions (looking at the same section of the
sheer from the bow view and then the transom view),
will begin to give you indications of overall fairness.
Visually compare a section of sheer on one side with
that same section on the other side. If one side doesn’t
look quite as good as the other, try to find out why.
You can use other guides to help with your inspection
of the sheer line. Position a fairly thick batten along the
top of the sheer to see whether it lies fair with the sheer
line. If the batten detects a hollow in the same area that
your eye does, your visual opinion is reinforced, and
you’ll feel a lot better about planing the high spots on
either side. Sometimes we cover the planed surface
with blue carpenter’s chalk to aid the sighting process.
This marking helps the eye to define the actual sheer
point, allowing you to measure it more accurately.
Planing down the sheers of most boats will probably be
the largest single planing job in the whole project. A
large boat may have a sheer clamp that is 2" (50mm)
thick bonded to a hull of perhaps 1" (25mm), for a
total thickness of 3" (75mm). Planing 3" of stock
around the entire outer perimeter of a hull can be a
laborious undertaking. We have saved many hours of
labor by using a power plane to rough plane the sheer
down to the point where you need hand planes only
for final fairing. This power plane has a long bed,
338
Later Production Steps

--- PAGE 353 ---
which allows you to develop and maintain overall
fairness as you are approaching the final sheer line
measurement markings.
Once you have established the sheer line, you can
further define the deck by shaping all of the bulkhead
tops to the exact profile. You may have preshaped the
bulkhead deck profiles from the lofting before you
installed them in the set-up. In this case, they only need
to be final faired with the sheer and other bulkheads.
With some boats, especially those with plywood web
frames, it is practical to make the deck beams a unitized
part of the frame before installing the frame in the set-
up. Then, after you turn the hull upright, you need
only to final fair the precut deck beams before installing
further framework such as longitudinal stringers. (See
Figure 27-1 and 27-2.)
Developing Deck Camber
All decks are curved, or have camber, so that rain or
boarding seas will easily run off. Usually, this camber is
given in the plans as so many inches of height for the
widest deck beam. Using only these two dimensions,
we usually make up a deck tram to lay out the deck
curvature mechanically for the largest deck beam and
then each succeeding smaller beam. Figure 27-3 shows
this process in detail.
Chapter 27 – Deck Construction
339
Figure 27-1  Web frames and deck beams in a set-up.
Figure 27-2  The same deck beams with stringers in place,
ready for decking.
Figure 27-3  Laying out deck camber with a tram. Lay out the
length of the largest deck beam (points A and B) on the lofting
board or other suitable surface, such as a sheet of plywood.
Draw a baseline between the two points for reference.
Measured up from center of this baseline, mark the maximum
deck height (point C). Typically this is 3" to 6" (75mm to
150mm) on a 10' (3m) wide boat. Drive a nail into the board
at Points A and B. Make two straight-edged battens, each at
least 12" (300mm) longer than the widest deck beam. Lay the
battens on the layout with their ends meeting at Point C and
their middles resting against the nails at Points A and B. Join
the two battens at the center with a plywood gusset, leaving a
small gap at the apex for use as a pencil guide. Holding a
pencil in the gap, slide the tram from side to side against the
nails drawing an arc the full width of the beam. As the beam
widths (nail spacing) get smaller, the tram will always draw
arcs in exact proportion to each other.
Point C represents the lofted
or projected deck centerline
The battens should be long
enough that each batten
will reach from A to B
Hold both battens tight
against the nails at A and B
Pencil

--- PAGE 354 ---
When you have to lay out only a few deck cambers,
such as the bulkheads, you can lay out the camber
geometrically. This procedure is explained in Figure 27-4.
On narrow hulls, typical of multihull craft, you can
shape all deck beams from a master pattern; all deck
beams, no matter what their width, will simply be
pieces of this one master arc. It is usual to use the
geometric method to lay out the master pattern for the
deck camber desired at the widest deck beam. Mark the
master pattern with a centerline dividing the maximum
deck width into two parts. Then match up this center
with the intended centerline of any smaller beams,
which you can then lay out.
Some deck designs might have unusual shapes that will
require full lofting to develop. This lofting usually does
not have to be as extensive as that done on a hull
because the curves will not be as complex. Also, the
dimensional accuracy will not be so critical. (This is not
to imply that it will not end up being as fair as the
hull.) Good examples of some modern designs that
need lofting are those that incorporate a “blister” in the
middle of the deck that acts as a cabin-type device to
give headroom down below.
Deck Framework
The deck surface represents a substantial portion of the
entire surface area of a hull. Because the deck is always
the highest part of the hull, its weight is of major
concern in trying to keep the center of gravity of the
overall structure as low as possible to improve the
seaworthiness and speed potential of the vessel. Usually,
trimming weight in the deck pays better dividends than
trying to trim it in the hull itself. You should do every-
thing that you can to make an adequately strong deck
at the least amount of weight within the proper safety
margin.
Decks are relatively flat surfaces, especially when
compared to the compound curved surfaces of a hull.
With flat surfaces, the extensive use of a supporting
framework is one of the best methods of giving strength
and stiffness. For custom and even semi-custom boats,
the framework-supported deck is one of the most
efficient and quickest methods of installing a deck
system. This supportive framework can take many
forms, depending on the type of boat and other
variables such as the cabin and cockpit layout. We use
two basic framework concepts and modify each of these
to fit the individual situation. The first method is rather
traditional, using large athwartship deck beams to
pr