arge of static electricity or a spark from a
combustion engine, light switch, or power tool. Some
fine powders and fillers can generate enough static 
electricity to ignite a flammable atmosphere. When
handling large quantities of powdered material, keep
airborne concentrations to a minimum and use
grounding devices on transfer equipment.
Common Shop Dusts
As mentioned, dust from partially cured epoxy is a
hazard and should be avoided. It can cause respiratory
problems if inhaled and dermatitis if allowed to settle
on skin. However, dust from fully cured epoxy is inert
and considered a nuisance dust. 
Inhalation of any dust in excessive quantities will cause
bronchial congestion. The world is full of dust and
normally our respiratory systems deal successfully with
large volumes of it. Mucus in our lungs attracts foreign
particles, which are moved up and out on fine hairs
called cilia. We can withstand incredible abuse, but
there are limits. Smoking, dry air, and high dust
concentrations all strain our bodies. If two or three
of these stressors combine, the burden becomes too
great, and significant health problems may develop. 
Dusts from minerals, such as asbestos and crystalline
(not amorphous) silica, are dangerous because of their
shape, which makes them difficult to expel from the
lungs. This is also true of airborne glass, carbon, and
similar fibers, which come from cutting and handling
glass tape or cloth or from sanding or grinding a fiber-
glass composite. Use these materials only with adequate
ventilation and appropriate respiratory protection, such
84
Getting Started
Evap. Rate
LEL2
PEL3
Solvent
Flash point1
(Butyl acetate =1)
(%)
(ppm)
Acetone
0°F (-17°C)
7.7
2.8
750
Methylene Chloride
Non-flammable
14.5
—
25
Methyl Ethyl Ketone (MEK)
16°F (-8°C)
4.6
1.4
200
Toluene
40°F (4°C)
1.5
1.1
50
Turpentine
95°F (35°C)
.38
0.8
100
Xylene
81°F (27°C)
.75
1.1
100
1 Flash point is the lowest temperature at which flammable vapor is given off by a liquid in a test vessel in sufficient concentration to be ignited in air when 
exposed momentarily to a source of ignition.
2 Lower explosive limit is the volume percentage of the vaporized solvent that makes an explosive mixture in air.
3 Permissible exposure limits were extracted from “Department of Public Health Air Contaminants Standard,” issued in 1990.
Figure 10-1 Table of comparative flash points, evaporation rates, Lower Explosive Limits (LEL), and Permissible Exposure Levels
(PEL). Information from this chart was extracted from “Fire Protection Guide to Hazardous Materials,” NFPA, 10th edition, 1991.

--- PAGE 99 ---
as an approved particulate dust mask. For comfort and
safety, avoid inhaling these dusts!
Wood Dust
Wood dust is a basic element of wooden boatshops.
Modern woodworking equipment, especially high-
speed abrasion tools, generate high concentrations of
wood dust. Sawdust and timber are so “organic” that
we assume they’re benign. In fact, they aren’t. Both can
be significant hazards to your health.
Dust from two North American trees can lead to other
respiratory ailments. Redwood dust is the cause of
sequoiosis, an acute respiratory disease similar to
pneumonia. Symptoms, including shortness of breath,
bronchial congestion, dry coughing, chills, sweating
and fever, usually appear a few hours after exposure.
Repeated attacks can result in permanent scarring of
lung tissue. Western red cedar dust can cause asthma
or rhinitis, an inflammation of the nasal passages. The
causative agent here seems to be plicatic acid, which
may also give the wood its well-known smell. West
Indian satinwood and mansonia are considered primary
irritants because rashes and blisters will appear after a
single contact. Cocobola and other tropical woods are
sensitizers: skin inflammation may develop after repeated
contact with them.
As Figure 10-2 indicates, the resins, alkaloids, tannins,
acids, salts, and gums of some wood species are toxic
to humans. Direct contact with dust, sap, or oil from
these trees may cause skin irritations and other allergic
reactions. Wood saps and oils contain irritants. These
allergens are reduced as lumber dries, so it is always
better to work with seasoned wood. 
Preventing Overexposure to Dusts
The following sensible shop suggestions may help to
reduce exposure to epoxy dusts, wood dusts, and fillers.
1. Use personal protective equipment if you handle
wood you suspect that you may be particularly 
sensitive to.
2. Sand only in shop areas with adequate ventilation.
If dust levels in your shop are high or if you are
sanding in a confined space for a long time, wear
an approved dust mask. If the entire shop is dusty,
make sure everyone, not just the person sanding,
wears a mask.
3. When you have a choice, use a cutting tool, a chisel
or plane, rather than an abrading tool, a polisher or
sandpaper. Wear safety glasses.
Chapter 10 – Safety
85
Respiratory
Skin and eye
Wood type
ailments1
allergies2
Cedar, western red (Thuja plicata)
X
X
Ebony (Diospyros)
X
X
Greenheart (Ocotea rodiaei)
X
X
Iroko (Chlorophora exceisa)
X
X
Mohogany, African (Khaya ivorensis)
X
X
Mohogany, American 
X
(Swietenia macrophylla)
Makore (Tieghemella heckelii)
X
X
Mansonia (mansonia altissima)
X
X
Obeche (Triplochiton scleroxylon)
X
X
Opepe (Nauclea trillesu)
X
X
Ramin (Gonystylus bancanus)
X
Rosewood, Brazilian (Dalbergia nigra)
X
Rosewood, East Indian 
X
(Dalbergia Ianfolia)
Satinwood, Ceylon
X
(Chloroxylon swietenia)
Satinwood, West Indian
X
(Fagara flava)
Sequoia, redwood
X
(Sequoia sempervirens)
Teak (Tectona granifs)
X
1 Respiratory ailments include bronchial disorders, asthma, rhinitis,
and mucosal irritations.
2 Skin and eye allergies includes contact dermatitis, conjunctivitis,
itching, and rashes.
Figure 10-2 Toxic woods and their hazards. This chart is
excerpted from “Health Hazards in Woodworking,” by Stanley
Wellborn, in Fine Woodworking, Winter, 1977, and includes
woods that are known to cause allergic, toxic, infectious, or
respiratory reactions. Although researchers point out that
not everyone is sensitive to these woods, they warn that
woodworkers should be particularly cautious when sanding
or milling them.

--- PAGE 100 ---
4. Use wet, rather than dry, sanding techniques on
epoxy. When sanding fresh epoxy, wait for several
days to ensure a complete cure. If you can’t wait to
sand, wear protective clothing, eye wear, and a
dust mask.
5. If you must sweep your floor, wear a dust mask and
use a sweeping compound. It is safer to vacuum
or mop because less dust goes into the air.
6. Use dust collectors on major dust producing
machinery.
7. Take steps to prevent fires. Store solvents safely
and make rules about smoking. Dust, solvent
vapors, and an ignition source can make an
explosive combination.
8. Prevent conditions that could create a static electrical
charge. If handling large quantities of dust or filler,
ground equipment properly.
9. When handling fillers, try to keep them from
becoming airborne, where they can remain
respirable for long periods.
Environmental Concerns
Volatile Emissions
Recent clean air regulations have added new require-
ments to reduce emissions of volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) and other air pollutants. Because of these
regulations and other environmental concerns, many
customers are asking builders to use products that
pollute less. The volatile emissions from our epoxies
are much lower than that of conventional vinyl esters
and polyesters used in the composites industry. While
our epoxy doesn’t have one major or easily identifiable
volatile component, emissions may include small
amounts of benzyl alcohol, low-molecular weight
amines, or a reactive diluent. 
To put it into perspective, making a laminate which
requires 10 gallons of conventional vinyl ester resin
would put 30 pounds of VOCs into the air. A laminate
requiring the same quantity of WEST SYSTEM epoxy
would emit only one-half pound of VOCs. Consider
the environmental impact when choosing the products
you will use on your projects.
Disposal of Leftover Resin and Hardener
WEST SYSTEM epoxy resin and hardeners are not
considered hazardous wastes in their purchased form,
using the criteria outlined in the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA). Some state and local regula-
tions and disposal facilities may require additional lab
analysis or evaluation of a Material Safety Data Sheet
(MSDS) to determine if your wastes satisfy their
requirements. It is always the end user’s responsibility
to properly dispose of wastes.
The following guidelines should help you make the
right decisions when it comes time to dispose of
unused epoxy resin and hardener.
1. You do not have to designate unused resin and
hardener as “waste” if you may use it on a future
project. WEST SYSTEM epoxy products have a long
shelf life when stored in sealed containers. Simply
use the product on another project.
2. You may dispose of cured epoxy (resin and hardener
mixed at the proper ratio and completely solidified)
as a non-hazardous solid.
3. Dispose of empty product containers only after you
follow these simple “empty” rules: (1) You’ve made
every effort to empty the container, and (2) no more
than three percent by weight of the total capacity of
the container remains in the container. Containers
drain more completely when warm.
4. Keep waste to a minimum. Work with small batches
of epoxy. When emptying a container for disposal,
collect the residue for use on a future project.
5. Reclaim for further use epoxy resin or hardener
collected from a spill or leak. If it is contaminated,
designate it as waste. If you have used a solvent to
clean up a spill, then the resultant mixture of solvent
and epoxy may become a regulated hazardous waste.
6. Respect the environment. Don’t release hazardous
wastes directly to the land, air, or water. Many
communities organize periodic waste collections
where consumers can take household wastes for
safe disposal, usually free of charge.
The disposal guidelines above may not comply with the
laws and regulations in your area. If you are uncertain,
86
Getting Started

--- PAGE 101 ---
refer to local, state, and federal regulations. Also, this
section has addressed only the disposal of our epoxy
resin and hardener. Boatbuilding and repair projects
generate many hazardous wastes, including bottom
paint, gel coat, paints, and solvents. These materials
can harm the environment, so identify and dispose of
them properly.
Summary
In this chapter, we have presented the health hazards
of mishandling epoxies and related materials. In the
course of a building or repair project, you may run a
greater risk of harm falling from a ladder or misusing
power tools. It’s self-defeating to worry a great deal about
epoxies if you are careless about using your table saw.
Good health can help you avoid and overcome the pro-
blems described here. Avoid stress, eat right, and exercise
to help reduce your susceptibility to these hazards.
Use common sense. The more informed you are about
the products you use, the better off you’ll be. Master
basic health and safety principles and take responsi-
bility for seeing them through. Your shop or business
will be a safe place and you’ll be able to continue work-
ing with WEST SYSTEM epoxy products for a long time. 
When it comes to setting the rules and work practices
of your shop, your health and safety are in your own
hands.
All WEST SYSTEM technical manuals include basic safety
information. All of our product labels provide appropriate
hazard warnings. If you need more specific information,
request MSDS through your distributor or dealer.
For additional information contact:
Safety Department 
West System Inc. 
P.O. Box 665 
Bay City, MI 48707 USA
safety@westsystem.com
Chapter 10 – Safety
87

--- PAGE 102 ---
88
Getting Started

--- PAGE 103 ---
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Chapter 11
Laminating and Bonding Techniques
Chapter 12
Scarfing
Chapter 13
Synthetic Fibers and WEST SYSTEM® Epoxy
Chapter 14
Hardware Bonding
Chapter 15
Coating and Finishing

--- PAGE 105 ---
The laminating and bonding techniques discussed in this chapter are fundamental to using epoxy and
have not changed over the years. When this book was first written, we used honeycomb paper core
material for most lightweight sandwich panels. Since then, the development of foam cores has provided
many new options. While this chapter describes the building of honeycomb-cored panels, the techniques
for foam or balsa cored panels are quite similar.
Our methods of boatbuilding are simple and flexible
because they rely on a few very basic skills and proce-
dures: laminating, bonding, scarfing, coating, and
finishing. Detailed instructions on using WEST SYSTEM®
Brand epoxy in each of these applications are provided
here and in the following chapters of this book.
In building our boats, we use two basic types of bonding
procedures, one for joining structural framework and
interior items, and the other for constructing hull and
deck skins. This chapter will concentrate on the first
of these and includes instructions for laminating wood,
laminating wood with core materials, and applying fillet
joints. Later chapters provide detailed information on
various methods of laminating hull skins.
We believe that bonding is the most efficient and struc-
turally sound way to join pieces of wood. While our
techniques for bonding wood fibers in epoxy are some-
what similar to the methods of bonding glass fiber in
polyester resin as used in fiberglass boat construction,
we use much less epoxy.
Principles of Laminating Lumber
Frames, ribs, keels, stems, and deck beams are structural
elements that are usually made by laminating several
pieces of lumber stock to form the finished parts. The
basic reason for laminating these items is to achieve
the desired shape of the particular parts as exactly as
possible. Traditionally, these shapes were formed by
steam bending, by using wood with a natural curve
similar to that desired, or by sawing curves on various
segments of straight stock and joining them together
with fasteners to form the desired shape.
Besides achieving the desired shape, laminating wood
has the following advantages:
• Laminating provides high strength with low poten-
tial for failure due to defect. Any one piece of wood
may be compromised with a defect, but if several
pieces are laminated together, a defect in one of the
pieces is only a minor problem; thus, the more
pieces involved in a lamination, the lower the failure
rate due to defects.
• A curved lamination made up of many thin pieces
of wood relieves most internal stresses prior to the
bonding of the parts into one unit. Internal stresses
can easily develop in thicker solid stock.
• Laminating can also be an economical use of material.
You can make use of shorter pieces of stock by incor-
porating scarf joints within a laminate, following
procedures described in Chapter 12. You can also
join smaller pieces to make up the width you want.
The thickness of each layer of stock within a laminate
is crucial to its success. Choices here depend totally on
the radius to which the piece must conform. Generally,
we select a thickness that bends easily around the
desired curve, checking it by sawing up a sample and
bending it around the form or shape over which we
plan to laminate. If it feels a bit stiff and difficult to
bend, we plane it down until it’s easier to position.
When you choose a stock thickness, remember that the
stiffness of wood is proportional to its thickness cubed,
so if one piece is twice as thick as another piece of the
same species, it will be about eight times as stiff. Be
sensitive to small changes in stock dimension because
they have major implications for the make-up of your
laminate.
Thickness of laminating stock will also affect spring-
back. Any lamination will retain a slight bit of memory.
When clamps are released and a piece is freed from its
Laminating and Bonding Techniques
C H A P T E R
11

--- PAGE 106 ---
form, it will relax and become slightly less curved than
the form. This new dimension is sometimes referred to
as the springback shape. There is less springback if
more layers are used to laminate a given thickness. 
Keep in mind that while it may be easy to bend one
layer of wood over a form, it will be a little more diffi-
cult to bend many layers. If you have a total of ten
veneers to bend at the same time, the combined resist-
ance of all of the pieces may be more than you are
prepared to handle with the clamping method you
have devised.
Don’t saw stock thinner than it needs to be. Except
for a possible reduction in springback, usually nothing is
gained structurally by adding more layers to a laminate.
When you use thin layers where thicker ones would
work well, you spend unnecessary time sawing, lami-
nating, and bonding the increased surface area.
Even when laminating is not needed to achieve a desired
shape, we always laminate when the stock needed
exceeds 1" (25mm) in thickness. With lumber stock
thicker than this, the potential for internal stresses
that may cause problems later on is too great, especially
with kiln-dried lumber, which is the most widely
available on the market today.
Preparing Stock for Laminating
The major goal when manufacturing stock for lami-
nating is to prepare the most dimensionally accurate
stock possible, which, when stacked together, will
leave as few voids as possible and will therefore require
less gap-filling adhesive for proper bonding. Most
laminating stock will have to be sawn to size, and we
recommend a table saw of at least 1 horsepower with
a 10" blade so that you can make both accurate and
smooth cuts on the surface of the stock being sawn.
This is especially important if you do not own or
have access to a thickness planer with which to
further dress the laminating stock.
Check the accuracy of your saw to make sure that the
guide is parallel with the blade and that the blade is
positioned exactly at right angles to the table surface.
Make cuts over 3" (7.5mm) deep (depending upon the
species of wood) by sawing in from both sides; that is,
make a saw cut of several inches from one side, then
turn the material end-for-end and saw in several inches
from the other side. You should set up ramps both in
front and in back of the saw to hold the stock in the
proper plane with the saw table surface as it passes
through the blades. Also, set up spring tension guides
to hold the stock flush with both the table surface and
the saw guide. Even with the best sawing techniques,
there will be some discrepancy in dimensional accuracy,
but the stock is usually acceptable for most laminating
situations.
If you plan to use a planer or jointer, keep the knives
sharp. Otherwise it will burnish the surface and
adversely affect the bond. It is a good practice to sand
planed high-density woods prior to gluing. Craftsmen
who take very good care of their tools sometimes wax
the tables of their planers. Since wax can interfere with
the quality of a bond, remove any wax residue that
might be on your planer before you begin.
Forms for Laminating
The block-on-floor method is most commonly used
to manufacture laminated ribs, frames, and stems. A
wooden floor or a thick piece of plywood serves as the
base to which you can affix blocks to form the shape
you desire. Transfer the shape to be laminated to this
surface from the lofting board. Then saw triangular
blocks, as illustrated in Figure 11-1, and drill several
holes in their backs for screws or nails. Fasten an
adequate number of blocks along the outside perimeter
of the shape on the floor. Then position a second set
of blocks opposite each of these, leaving a sufficient
distance in between to insert both the lamination to be
clamped and a clamping wedge. If the curve is severe,
use the clamping wedge with a pad which you can
place against the stock. Drive the wedge between the
blocks on the floor and the clamping pad. You will only
need enough blocks to hold the laminate to its shape
because you can use any number of clamps between
the blocks to achieve enough clamping pressure on
the laminate once you have developed its shape.
Some laminations may be too wide to be handled easily
with the block-on-floor method. In these cases, you can
manufacture a simple mold form similar to that shown
in Figure 11-3. Lay out the shape you want on thick
construction-grade plywood, allowing for the thickness
of the lath planking which you will nail across the
92
Core Boatbuilding Techniques

--- PAGE 107 ---
plywood edge. Cut out two identical pieces of plywood
and place them at the desired distance from one another.
Then fasten and bond the lath planking into position
at desired intervals. Add any additional bracing that is
needed to make the structure sufficiently sturdy. Using
additional crosspieces to press the lamination material
against the form, clamp the laminating stock to this
form by positioning a clamp at either edge of the mold
form.
Often, the hull framework itself serves as a natural
laminating form, and you can save a great deal of time
by taking advantage of this. Take special care that no
damage occurs to the framework during the laminating
Chapter 11 – Laminating and Bonding Techniques
93
Figure 11-1 Cleats and clamping arrangement for laminating
structural pieces on a floor or baseboard.
Figure 11-2 Laminating a long structural member for
trimaran crossbeam using cleats secured to the lofting floor.
Figure 11-3 A simple form for laminating wider pieces.
Figure 11-4 Laminating floor timbers using stringers as the
form.
Clamps (plenty of them)
should be clean and easy to
adjust before the laminating
process begins.
Spacers to keep
timber off floor
and ease
clamping.
Knees or cleats nailed to
lofting on floor. Knees on
inside can be positioned to
allow adjustment of timber
with wedges.
1" x 2" cleats
Plywood sides

--- PAGE 108 ---
procedure. Shield the framework from clamp marks
with the use of clamping pads and protect members
against any excess epoxy with a plastic sheet barrier.
Figure 11-4 shows some frames being laminated using
the stringers as a form. Further details on this type of
laminating procedure are discussed in Chapter 21.
Allowance for Springback
All laminations will relax from the curve that they have
been clamped to. This springback may range from 1⁄16"
to several inches, depending upon two factors: the
severity of the curve the lamination must take, and the
number of pieces used to make up a lamination. The
object, of course, is to try to anticipate what the spring-
back might be and then to overbend your lamination
so that when it relaxes, it will assume the exact shape
desired. Refer to Figure 11-6 to determine the amount
of springback that a lamination will have. It is rare for 
a lamination to end up exactly as desired, although
you can come very close and then take several corrective
measures, which will be discussed later.
The Dry Run and Clamping Procedures
If you don’t have much experience or if you are faced
with a complex or unusually shaped form, try a dry run
of your lamination. Assemble and clamp your pieces
with no epoxy to see if there are any flaws in your
approach. Also check at this time to be sure that you
have enough clamps. Because there is no epoxy in the
way, you will be able to see gaps and take appropriate
corrective action, including increasing clamping
pressure and re-machining your stock. Once WEST
SYSTEM epoxy is applied, you will have only a short
time to correct any mistakes. If something goes wrong,
you could lose the whole lamination and all the work
and material that goes with it.
To distribute clamping pressure over more area, make
up clamping pads out of pieces of wood to be placed
between the clamp jaws and the stock. The pads will
also prevent any clamp marks from occurring on the
lamination surface. When you have clamped the lamina-
tion to your satisfaction, it is sometimes helpful to mark
the position of each clamp on the stock so that you can
reposition it quickly when actual laminating begins.
When you remove the clamps from their trial run
positions, place them close by so that you won’t have
94
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
When a strip of wood, a ply, is bent to a curve and released,
it springs back to its original shape. A stack of loose plies
will do the same. When these plies are glued together while
clamped to a curve, they tend to stay curved, but will
straighten out or spring back a little. When building the
mold or form for the laminate, it’s common to make the curve
a little tighter to compensate for the springback. The amount
of springback depends on the number of plies in the laminate,
not in the ply material or the ply thickness. A simple formula
can help predict the amount of springback you can expect:
y = x/n2
y = the amount of springback
x = the amount of deflection
n = the number of plies
Thus with four plies, the springback (y) will be 1⁄16" if the
amount of deflection (x) is 1". By using plies half the thick-
ness, you double the number of plies for a given thickness
of laminate and reduce springback four times—in this case
to 1⁄64".
Figure 11-5 Cleats are screwed to a baseboard to force
laminates into the shape required. Clamps in the pile in the
upper right will be used during the dry run and the final
lamination.
Figure 11-6 Computing springback in a curved laminate.
From Fine Woodworking 119, July 1996.

--- PAGE 109 ---
to hunt around for them and can position each clamp
as quickly as possible.
Clamps are usually heavy and cumbersome, and they
can take a lot of time to position and tighten. It is
extremely important, before laminating begins, that
there is a reserve of clamps close by, that they are of
sufficient size, and that they have been checked for
workability (i.e., that no glue lumps are on the threads).
Whenever we are preparing for laminating without the
luxury of a dry run, we line up more clamps and clamp
pads than we actually think will be needed and place
them at various intervals around the laminating area for
quick access. For speed, we recommend that you use
the adjustable bar-type clamps rather than C-clamps,
which take much longer to fit into place. If you do use
C-clamps, we suggest that you open them all before-
hand to the approximate dimension you will need.
Applying WEST SYSTEM® Epoxy
For laminations that are large and composed of many
pieces, you should organize the adhesive application
procedure so that it can progress quickly. Cover a bench
with polyethylene sheet and nail several sticks across it
to keep the laminations from touching the bench surface
when they are covered with adhesive and turned over.
Coat one surface of the lamination with an adhesive
mixture, roll the piece over on the strips, and coat the
opposite surface. The bottom and top pieces of the
lamination, of course, need coating on one surface only.
As you coat the pieces with adhesive, assemble them in
a neat stack in preparation for insertion in the form.
From the time that you begin, you will have about an
hour to apply the adhesive to all of the lamination
members, insert the members in the form, and apply
the clamping pressure. If the temperature is over 85°F
(29°C), you may not have this much time, even when
using a slow hardener. When laminating, adhesive
application usually requires the most time, but several
applicators working simultaneously can speed up this
operation.
We almost always use a high-density filler to make up
the adhesive mixture for laminating, determining the
thickness of this mixture according to the quality of our
wood. Rough sawn surfaces may require epoxy and
filler mixed to gap-filling, thick syrup consistency. With
sufficient clamping pressure, the epoxy used to laminate
well-planed stock will need little if any filler to guarantee
adequate adhesion.
Thoroughly stir your epoxy and filler and pour it into
a roller pan. Use a foam roller cut to the desired width
(the width of the lamination) to apply the adhesive to
your wood. Roll vigorously with downward pressure
to control the amount of epoxy on the bonding surface.
When a thicker adhesive mixture is rolled on the
surface, it will leave a thicker film, which is usually the
desired effect. A thinner adhesive mixture is easier to
control and you can roll it on the surface either in a
very thin film or in thicker quantities, as you wish.
Again, the quality of the laminating material will deter-
mine how much epoxy you need to apply to the mating
surfaces.
When you have applied adhesive to all of the mating
surfaces (we always coat both mating surfaces), you are
ready to form the lamination. If you have already done
a dry run, the only thing you need to add is polyeth-
ylene, which you can wrap around the lamination stack
to prevent it from becoming bonded to any of the form
members, clamps, or the floor. Be careful to prevent any
of this plastic from inadvertently becoming lodged
between some of the laminations, preventing a good
bond. Then apply clamping pressure, taking up the
clamps slowly as the adhesive squeezes out from
Chapter 11 – Laminating and Bonding Techniques
95
Figure 11-7 Uneven clamping pressure forces epoxy out of
the joint, causing distortion or a twist in the timber. Clamps
should be placed in the middle of the laminate, spaced evenly
and tightened with consistent pressure.
Uneven clamping pressure
forces epoxy up and out of
the joint, causing distortion
or twist in the timber.
Clamps should be staggered
and tightened evenly.
Pads to protect wood
and distribute load.

--- PAGE 110 ---
between the laminations. Excess adhesive moves to the
edges slowly, and you may have to tighten all clamps or
wedges at several intervals of perhaps 10 minutes. A
small amount of adhesive escaping from the edges is a
healthy sign that there are no voids within the lamina-
tion itself. However, if an excessive amount of adhesive
is escaping, then you probably applied more than was
needed; with the next lamination, you should try
applying a little less. There is no need to apply exces-
sive force to the lamination with the clamps; in fact,
excessive clamping pressure may create undesirable
stresses within a lamination. Good, solid contact
pressure is all you really need.
Fitting to Shape
All laminations, after they are manufactured, will have
what we call a mating surface, which you will eventu-
ally bond to another part of the boat. This surface is
usually the shape used to determine the setting up of
the lamination forms. A lamination can be formed over
a male or female form. The female form’s surface usually
describes the mating surface for a rib or frame lamina-
tion. If a male form is used, the thickness of the rib or
frame being laminated should be deducted from the
form dimensions to manufacture a lamination with a
correct mating surface. 
When the adhesive has cured, remove the lamination
from its form and check the mating surface for accuracy.
You can do this with a template made from the body
plan, or perhaps by fitting the lamination in the hull or
mold set-up where it will eventually be positioned. If
springback has been severe but it is a light lamination
that is easily bent, you can probably bend the lamina-
tion to the desired position when you install it in the
boat and should have no problems. For a heftier lamina-
tion with springback that you cannot easily bend to the
proper shape, mark it and machine it to the proper
dimension, using a saw and hand plane. In addition,
you may need to bevel the lamination or do other
special machining, such as notching for stringers or
keel. Usually this work is done when the lamination is
fitted into its final position in the boat.
If the laminated piece will be exposed in the finished
boat, as ribs and frames sometimes are, plane or sand
its sides and face and round its interior edges as desired.
It is far easier to precoat and prefinish at your workbench
rather than inside your hull, so do these jobs before in-
stalling your part.
Using Core Materials
Lightweight core materials are often sandwiched between
denser, load-bearing skins of materials like fiberglass.
These cores may also be laminated between two pieces
of wood to form rigid, lightweight panels. This is a
particularly effective way to build extra stiffness, with
96
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 11-8 Laminated frames fit to a hull.
Figure 11-9 Laminated floors, fit and prefinished, ready to be
installed.

--- PAGE 111 ---
Chapter 11 – Laminating and Bonding Techniques
97
little additional weight, into parts that have a lot of
surface area. It may be used on cockpit floors, bunk
bottoms, bulkheads, partitions, decks, cabin tops, and
even hulls.
Many materials have good panel stiffness, but they are
also relatively heavy by the square foot. A core must be
lightweight, and it must have adequate crush and shear
strengths. We’ve found three core materials that bond
well with epoxy and produce good results when lami-
nated between wood skins: lightweight wood, such as
balsa, in both flat and end-grain dimensions; various
types of foam; and manufactured honeycomb materials,
especially resin-impregnated honeycomb paper.
Balsa is one of the better core materials. When used in
its end-grain dimension, it makes a core with excellent
crush resistance. We’ve also tried balsa in flat grain, using
it both as a core and to improve structural strength by
contributing to the overall stiffness and strength of a
panel. End-grain balsa is available with a special surface
treatment that is designed to reduce resin absorption
into the core. It is also available in an untreated form.
When using the untreated type, there is a possibility
of epoxy starvation to the glue joint of the layer glued
over it. We have seen epoxy drain completely through 1⁄2"
(12mm) thick end-grain balsa, so be sure to experi-
ment with gluing technique if you are using the
unsealed type. 
We have often used other lightweight woods in flat
grain dimension as cores in some framework lamina-
tions. Laminated deck beams are good examples of
how to save weight higher up in a hull by combining
proper proportions of a low-density wood, say, cedar,
with a high-density wood, Douglas fir or mahogany.
The resulting lamination has adequate stiffness and
strength and is much lighter than one made entirely
of high-density wood.
Resin-impregnated honeycomb paper is the cheapest
of the various honeycombs available, and it is easy to
bond and apply. Prices vary by cell size, resin content,
and thickness. We used paper honeycomb for years
and found its light weight and good crush and shear
strengths perfectly adequate in many applications.
Honeycomb paper is helpful on both flat and curved
surfaces. It can be applied to slightly compounded
areas, such as decks and cabin tops, because its cells
are able to bend slightly and deform. Honeycombs
are available in a wide variety of materials, from paper
to titanium. Metallic honeycombs are among the most
expensive core materials.
Foam cores have become a reasonable alternative to
balsa and honeycombs. Foams cover a wide range in
price and density, but they are generally more expensive
than balsa and paper honeycombs. They are better
insulators than other core materials. WEST SYSTEM epoxy
will not chemically react in a destructive way with
foams. But, because of the insulating properties of foam,
Figure 11-10 A DN-class iceboat hull bottom showing
honeycomb core material between frames. The outer
plywood skin has not yet been bonded to this panel.

--- PAGE 112 ---
epoxy will exotherm easier in a lamination with foam
than with other materials especially in a heavy applica-
tion or very thick glue line.
Interlaminate application rates of WEST SYSTEM epoxy
vary a great deal. Tests on samples of wood hull laminate
show an average rate of 12.8 square feet per pound
(2.7kg/m2) of epoxy per glue line. The application rate
of a medium-density mixture of epoxy and filler,
applied with a notched plastic spreader to bond core
materials to plywood skins, is about 18 square feet per
pound (3.7kg/m2) of epoxy. A rate of approximately 28
square feet per pound (5.7kg/m2) can be expected for
mixtures applied over coated surfaces. Factors deter-
mining these rates include surface condition of the
substrate, pot life of the epoxy, ambient temperature,
work habits, size of the job, and quality of clamping
pressure.
Bonding Core Materials
Different core materials require slightly different bonding
techniques. End-grain wood and foam absorb epoxy at
unusually high rates, and allowances must be made for
this in order to guarantee good joint strength. The
cells of resin-impregnated paper honeycomb bond
to wood in a very atypical pattern of small fillets.
Normal laminating procedures are sufficient, however,
when your core material is low-density wood in flat
grain dimension.
Large quantities of WEST SYSTEM epoxy will penetrate
end-grain wood. When too much epoxy is absorbed
by a wood core, there will not be enough adhesive for
a strong bond with a skin, and the joint will be epoxy-
starved. To solve this problem, we recommend a two-
step application procedure. First, use a foam roller to
apply unthickened epoxy to the surfaces to be bonded.
Your coating should be adequate but not overabundant.
Next, apply a mixture of epoxy and filler, in thick syrup
consistency, to the core. Use enough of the mixture to
fill any voids between the core and the surrounding
skins.
This adhesive mixture may be too thick to apply evenly
with a foam roller, so use a notched spreader like the
WEST SYSTEM 809 Notched Spreader shown in Figure
11-12 to apply even, controlled amounts of the thicker
adhesive, especially over large areas. You may also
modify an 808 Plastic Spreader by using a chisel, knife
or bandsaw to cut notches in the edge. Experiment to
98
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
In sandwich construction, fiber reinforced
resin serves as the structural skin of a
part. Separating two structural skins
with a core material will improve the
composite’s stiffness and reduce
weight, much like the web of an I-beam
separates the flanges. Cores can be of
plywood, end-grain balsa, foam or
honeycomb. Normally, the core is
much lighter than the skin material.
Like most materials, different cores
have advantages and disadvantages. 
Loads tend to concentrate at the load
bearing skin/core interface, so low-
strength cores are prone to shear
failure. Cores are low in density and tend to insulate the laminate.
This can be detrimental as heat concentrates on the skin, softening
the resin or causing adhesion problems between the skin and core.
To facilitate assembly around curved surfaces, cores are often grid-
scored. As the core passes around curves, the grid score opens. If
not filled, the open score may act as a conduit for moisture passage.
Figure 11-12 The 809 Notched Spreader has three different
notch sizes to apply epoxy at different rates.
Figure 11-11 Core types for sandwich construction.

--- PAGE 113 ---
find the notch depth and frequency that will deposit the
correct amount of epoxy/filler mix on your wood
as in Figure 11-13.
Foam cores absorb slightly less epoxy than end-grain
wood, and their absorption rates are very predictable.
When the large pores on the foam’s surface are filled,
the rest of the epoxy/filler blend will fill gaps between
the core and laminate skin. Since the object is to make
a bond which is at least as strong as the foam but is
lightweight, use low-density, gap-filling filler; even if the
mixture is heavily loaded with filler, the bond will be
stronger than the foam. To be sure that all voids are
filled on more porous foams, use additional low-density
additive to make a thicker adhesive mixture. The
notched squeegee will help force thick adhesive into
foam pores.
Paper honeycomb presents an unusual bonding situation.
Because it is made up of cells ranging from 1⁄4" to 1⁄2" (6-
12mm) in diameter, this type of core is actually joined
to only a small percentage of the total area of the
surface skins. Many little fillets form when honeycomb
is bonded in lamination. The adhesive “gets legs” as it
is applied to the core and, due to its surface tension,
travels up the cell walls a distance of up to 1⁄8" (2mm),
although 1⁄16" (1mm) is normal. This process results in a
bond that is far stronger than the paper honeycomb.
Take steps to be sure that these little fillets develop. First,
use a foam roller to wet out the edges of the honeycomb
with unthickened epoxy. Don’t try to deposit quantities
of epoxy on the edges as you do this—the goal is to
saturate cell wall edges in the same way that you apply
a first penetrating coat of epoxy to wood. Then, still
using the foam roller, apply a thick coat of unthickened
epoxy to the surfaces of the structural skins. If your
skins are precoated, slightly less epoxy is required. In
this case, follow the directions in Chapter 15 to prepare
the coated surfaces for bonding. To avoid the formation
of high spots, assemble your lamination before the
epoxy on the honeycomb has a chance to set up.
If the fit between a honeycomb core and plywood skins
is not close or you suspect that your clamping pressure
may be inadequate, you may wish to modify this tech-
nique. Coat your core with unthickened epoxy and then
coat your wood with a mixture of epoxy and low-density
filler. The viscosity of this mixture depends on the fit
between core and skins. Use more filler if you have a
rough fit, less if your surfaces present fewer gaps. If
you know that there is perfect contact between your core
and wood, you may need no additive, provided that you
apply the epoxy in sufficient quantity.
When you use a honeycomb core, be careful to avoid
dry bonds within the laminate. This is usually a result
of the wood’s absorbing too much epoxy. If the skins
absorb most of the epoxy you apply, there will not be
enough epoxy on the surface to develop the fillet bond
needed for maximum strength. One way to prevent this
is to coat the wood, wait an hour or so until the epoxy
is tacky, and then apply a fresh cot and bond the
honeycomb to the skins.
Whatever the core material and adhesive mixture used,
structural strength will be only as good as the quality
of the bond that is developed between the components.
We suggest that you make a sample laminate of the
combination that you intend to use and then destruc-
tion test it so that you can assess the quality of the
bond. This is a simple and quick way to determine both
the ideal mixture and the amount of adhesive needed
for a given surface to ensure adequate bonding. Once
you have tested several laminates with a given type of
core material, you will have gained enough experience
to be able to determine the adequate amount of adhesive
for a given surface without having to test each laminate.
To perform a destruction test, make two samples, each
about 3" wide  10" long (75mm  250mm). Place
two 2"  2"  4" (50mm  50mm  100mm) blocks
Chapter 11 – Laminating and Bonding Techniques
99
Figure 11-13 Applying thickened epoxy with a modified
plastic spreader. Cut notches in the edge, sized and spaced
to suit the desired rate of application.

--- PAGE 114 ---
of wood near the edge of a bench, roughly 10" apart,
and support one test sample on them. Using a clamp in
the middle of your sample, slowly deflect
the wood toward the bench until it breaks. Study the
relationships between the various components to deter-
mine where the sample failed and how. Take your
second sample, put it in a vise, and hit it with a large
hammer. This will give you some idea of how well
your sample will withstand shock loads.
Forming and Clamping Cored Laminates
Cored laminates are easy to make if their surfaces are
flat, a bit more difficult if slightly curved, and very
difficult if curved in more than one plane.
To manufacture flat parts such as bulkheads, partitions,
doors, counter tops, bunk bottoms, and floors, look for
a flat area which is at least as large as the part to be
laminated. This can be the floor or a bench. If you are
planning many flat laminates, it is worth building a
special form. Your work area must be perfectly even
with no twists or warps.
Assemble components, usually two outer skins and
a core, on your surface, apply adhesive, and then use
weights for pressure over the surface area of your
assembly. Almost anything that is easy to handle and
weighs from 3 to 10 pounds (1.4 to 4.5kg) can be used
as a weight. Many common items, including bricks and
small pieces of scrap steel, work well. In our shop, we
often use double-wrapped sandbags.
The amount of weight you need depends on your partic-
ular lamination. In all cases, pressure should be sufficient
for complete contact between the layers. If the outer
skins are thin plywood, very little weight is necessary
unless the panels are badly warped. Distribute pressure
over the entire surface of the skin using leftover stringer
stock, scrap lumber of equal thickness, or thicker pieces
of plywood or particleboard to spread the load.
You can apply some clamping pressure to the lamina-
tion with staples. Usually, cored laminations have an
outer perimeter that is made up of a solid wood material,
which we refer to as core framing. This material is
prepared beforehand from stock the exact thickness of
the core material and can be used wherever desired in
conjunction with the core material within the laminate.
Some cored laminates may be designed to have a great
deal of core framing within the laminate so that only
staple pressure is needed for assembly. However, staple
assembly is usually successful only with thicker plywood
skins because of their increased panel stiffness. In most
cases, even with the use of staples, weighting will still
be needed to ensure a good bond between the laminate
components.
We usually plan our cored laminate layout right on
the plywood panel from which we will cut one of the
exterior skins. Once the perimeter of the laminate is
determined, you can lay out the exact positions and
dimensions of the core framing right on the panel.
Cut the laminate skin slightly larger than size (to facili-
tate final fitting) and make a duplicate that will become
the second skin on the opposite side of the core material.
Saw the prepared core framing to length and position
it around the perimeter of the laminate and wherever
else desired within the interior of the laminate. When
the core framing is fitted, bond it into position on the
marked skin surface using either temporary or perma-
nent staples to hold the pieces in place until the adhesive
100
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 11-14 A cored deck constructed using lightweight
beams and resin-coated paper honeycomb core material. See
Chapter 27 for a full description of this deck construction.

--- PAGE 115 ---
can cure. Fit the core material around the core framing
and apply the adhesive. With all of the parts in place,
you can complete the laminate by bonding on the
second skin.
You can make slightly curved cored laminates using
techniques similar to those used for flat laminates, but
you must build a special curved form. This curved
form must be a fair arc over which the components of
the laminate will bend easily. A proper form will help
ensure that the curve in the laminate is fair and will
require fewer clamps and weights for good contact
pressure between the components. A slight curve can
also facilitate clamping. Position several long boards of
adequate stiffness across the laminate at given intervals
and clamp them down to the form at each end.
Cored laminates with compound curves are very difficult
to manufacture unless you use enough core framing
material within the laminate to allow for a good deal
of staple pressure. Even then, you should not make
these cored laminates of solid panels, but should mold
them with veneers or strips of plywood over a form,
as discussed in Chapter 20. The most successful com-
pounded cored laminates have been manufactured
using vacuum bag techniques. Unfortunately, prepara-
tions for this method require a great deal of time, and
it is uneconomical when only one laminate is to be
manufactured. Achieving a mold surface with good
vacuum integrity involves considerable work and
expense.
Bonding with the Fillet
The fillet has become one of the most versatile methods
of bonding wood, especially for joining parts at or near
Chapter 11 – Laminating and Bonding Techniques
101
Figure 11-15 Cockpit seats showing an inner skin bonded
to the framing and a matching outer skin. Core material can
be cut to fit the spaces within the frames. In this case the
framing itself was adequate to support the plywood panels.
Figure 11-16 A cockpit sole with a curved shape using core
laminates. This was accomplished by laminating a curve in
the frames before they were bonded together.

--- PAGE 116 ---
right angles to each other. Basically, a fillet is a contin-
uous bead of thickened epoxy mixture applied to the
angle between two parts to be joined. It increases the
surface area of the bond and serves as a structural
brace. Filleting requires no fasteners of any kind and
can result in a joint that is as strong as the parts being
joined together. The use of fillets in conjunction with
fiberglass tape is fully explained in Chapter 24.
There are some limitations with filleting, however.
The fillet cannot join two materials end-for-end and is
most successful for joining parts at roughly right angles.
The fillet also works best when joining thinner wood
material, such as plywood up to 1⁄4" (6mm) thick. At
this size, it is relatively easy to manufacture a joint that
is equal to material strength. As the material joined
becomes thicker, the fillet size must increase accord-
ingly. The large fillet becomes less attractive because
of material costs (wood is much cheaper than epoxy)
and application difficulties (a large fillet becomes very
unwieldy as its mass increases, due to the consistency
of the material in the uncured stage).
A fillet is especially effective when joining parts that
meet at difficult angles. A good example would be
a bulkhead that meets with the hull skin at varying
angles along its perimeter. Traditionally, a wood cleat
would be laboriously laminated and fitted to join hull
and bulkhead, requiring many hours. However, a fillet
of the proper size may be just as effective structurally
and can be installed easily and quickly. Other interior
items, such as cabinets, bunks, partitions, seats, counters,
and floors, can also be quickly installed in the hull with
the use of the fillet. Some of these items, such as shelves
and cabinets, may be installed with small fillets that,
although not up to material strength, may be adequate
because they serve no critical structural purpose.
We often use the fillet to reinforce existing joints. The
fillet can be a simple and fast way to increase the
bonding surface area between two parts. For example,
you can give a frame or stringer more contact bonding
area with the hull skin by installing a fillet on either
side of the member. The alternative might be to
choose a thicker stringer or deck beam than is really
needed for the sole purpose of developing more
bonding area; the fillet can solve the problem with
considerably less weight.
To make up filleting mixture, use WEST SYSTEM epoxy
and various fillers. The object is to make the best joint
at the least weight using the lowest density filleting
material possible. At the same time, your joint must
have enough strength so that any joint failure will occur
in the wood rather than in the fillet itself. Our 406
Colloidal Silica Filler is stronger and heavier than our
low-density fillers. For high-strength applications, we
use 406 Filler mixed with epoxy to a peanut butter
consistency. This produces a material that spreads easily
but does not sag under its own weight.
In many situations, a high-density fillet is not needed
because its physical properties are far above the grain
strength of wood, so we make up a lower density
material using a combination of 406 and low-density
fillers, varying the proportions depending on the
strength required. WEST SYSTEM 405 Filleting Blend
may be added to mixtures that will be used for exposed
fillets on certain woods. Its color will blend well with
some woods to make fillets less conspicuous.
Figure 11-18 shows the results of tests we performed
using various plywood thicknesses and epoxy/406
Colloidal Silica fillet sizes. These results apply only to
the specific plywood we tested and might be different if
another wood were used. Because of the many variables
involved, we cannot advise on the sizes and types of
fillets needed for every application. You can easily
102
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 11-17 Cross section of low-density and high-density
fillets. Low-density fillets require a much larger radius than
high-density fillets to make joints of the same strength.
Low-Density
Fillet
High-Density
Fillet

--- PAGE 117 ---
perform your own testing to determine the exact fillet
you need. This type of testing will also quickly give you
a feel for the strengths and limitations of the fillet as a
joining method. When you have gained knowledge
through use, you will find many places in your project
where fillets will both improve your structure and save
you time.
Make a test sample similar to the one in Figure 11-18,
using the material you plan to join. Take an educated
guess about the filler and fillet size needed to develop
material strength. Make a fillet on your sample and
allow it to cure for at least 24 hours or less if you apply
heat. Put the control part of your test piece in a vise and
load it. The load should be exerted a distance of about
eight times the thickness of the material, measured from
the base of the joint.
If your sample breaks clean, leaving the fillet intact, you
have achieved material strength, the breaking strength
of the material as a cantilevered beam. This is consid-
ered strong enough for most engineering in boat
construction. If the break occurs within the fillet or the
wood fiber of the control piece, make a new sample
with a larger fillet. Repeat the test until the fillet
performs to your satisfaction.
Applying the Fillet
There are five steps in the process of applying a fillet:
1. Fitting and marking the parts to be joined.
2. Applying epoxy/filler mixture to the joint.
3. Forming the fillet to the size and shape desired.
4. Cleaning up the fillet.
5. Sanding and coating.
If the fillet is to be a practical joining method, you must
learn to make it with both ease and speed. At the same
time, you will want to make fillets that are pleasing to
the eye so that they will not detract from the beauty
of your boat. Your first try at filleting will probably be
awkward and slow, but it doesn’t take long to develop
reasonable skills.
Fit all parts as carefully as possible. Reducing gaps
between pieces reduces mechanical loading on the filler
and improves joint strength potential. When you are
satisfied with your fit, make several surmarks up and
down the joint and across both pieces so that you can
remove and accurately replace them later. To save
mixing and preparation time, fit and mark a number
of parts and then bond them all in one large filleting
operation.
Chapter 11 – Laminating and Bonding Techniques
103
Plywood
Fillet
thickness
radius
High-density fillets
5⁄32" (4mm)
5⁄8" (15mm)
3⁄16" (5mm)
3⁄4" (18mm)
1⁄4" (6mm)
7⁄8" (22mm)
Low-density fillets
5⁄32" (4mm)
13⁄4" (44mm)
3⁄16" (5mm)
13⁄4" (44mm)
1⁄4" (6mm)
13⁄4" (44mm)
Figure 11-18 Failure mode for proper sized fillet radius is
shown in Cross Section A. Failure mode for inadequate sized
fillets is shown in Cross Section B. The chart shows the radius
size required for high-density fillets to produce a wood failure
(A) rather than a joint bond failure (B). Results vary depending
on plywood quality and thickness, and filler density. Experiment
to find the proper radius for the materials you are using.
A High-Density Fillet
Experimentation with the
fillet can produce a joint
strong enough that failure
will occur in the plywood
rather than in the
wood-epoxy bond.
8X
Load
A Low-Density Fillet
Fillet fails in tension
and starts wood
failure along
grain.
Low-density
fillet compresses
under load.
Wood failure
along the base
of the joint.
X

--- PAGE 118 ---
If the parts to be joined are uncoated, it’s a good idea to
apply an initial coating of epoxy to the area of the joint.
When fillets are made on bare wood, the substrate may
absorb too much epoxy from the filleting mixture. Then,
the mixture thickens and becomes almost impossible to
work with. If the wood has been precoated, as described
in Chapter 15, you will need only to sand the joint area
to be sure of an adequate bond.
When the parts are ready, mix the epoxy and appropriate
fillers. Good, smooth fillets depend on the correct thick-
ness of the filleting mixture. With a little experience, you
will quickly learn what works best for you. The viscosity
of this mixture becomes more crucial with larger fillets.
As the mass and weight of your epoxy/filler combination
increase, so does its tendency to sag.
One solution to this problem is to make the mix even
thicker, but this results in fillets which are difficult to
apply and which will require a lot of clean up later. A
thick filleting mixture may not properly penetrate the
substrate and so may result in weak bonding. We find
that a two-step installation procedure, applying about
60% of the joint on the first pass and the remainder
when this stiffens up, is effective in this situation.
Begin making your fillet by applying a liberal amount
of fillet mixture to the mating edge of the joint. Then
position the part so that its surmarks line up exactly,
using staples, small nails, or clamps as appropriate to
hold it temporarily in place. Much of the epoxy/filler
mixture you use here will squeeze out and become part
of the fillet; the rest will fill any gaps between the two
parts. Next, apply fillet mixture all along the line of the
joint in the quantity needed for the desired fillet size.
Most often the mixing stick is used to move adhesive
from pot to joint. The WEST SYSTEM 804 Mixing Stick
has a round end for applying and shaping fillets and a
beveled square end for scraping up excess epoxy.
Continue using your stick to smooth out the fillet and
to remove excess material and redeposit it where
needed. Applying just the right amount of epoxy/filler
blend to a joint is one of the keys to filleting success. It
is better to add just a little more than to end up short
because it’s more difficult to add material later than to
remove a little excess.
In the past, we have recommended a variety of tools
for fillet application. Disposable cake decorating bags
are clean and accurate for laying down a bead of fillet
mixture, but they are difficult to find. Syringes, too,
104
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 11-19 A disposable syringe being used to apply a
bead of thickened epoxy.
Figure 11-20 The proper sequence for (1) coating and
joining the parts, (2) applying and shaping the fillet and (3)
cleaning away excess epoxy outside of the fillet.
Joint coated with epoxy and
temporarily held with staples
Sharpened tongue
depressor or putty
knife
Tangent point of fillet
stick produces a clean
margin area that
aids in the cleanup of
excess epoxy mixture
Excess
Fillet
stick
1
2
3

--- PAGE 119 ---
make good applicators, but they require time-consuming
loading and cleaning. While it may seem to be efficient
to use your finger to apply and smooth fillets, don’t do
it. A splinter in the joint may cut through your glove
and into your finger, and this can be quite painful.
To finish your joint, take a piece of thin stock a little
wider than the fillet itself and round off one end. Cut
the radius of this curve to match the desired radius
of your fillet when the stick is held so that it bisects
the joint. Because this dimension is very important in
controlling fillet size, round off several sticks and experi-
ment with them. The rounded end of an 804 Mixing
Stick creates a 3⁄8" (9mm) radius fillet. With a fillet stick
of any given radius, you can further control fillet size by
changing the angle of your passes. When you hold the
stick at a 10° angle to your joint, your fillet will be
flatter, while if you hold it at a larger angle, it will be
curved.
The experienced applicator can form a perfect fillet with
only one pass of the fillet stick over a properly applied
fillet mixture. It is not unusual, however, to need several
passes to form and smooth the fillet to the desired state.
Always make the final pass with the fillet stick with some
firmness so that the excess fillet mixture will be deposited
on either side of the fillet. The pressure on the fillet stick
is important because it creates a gap between the excess
material and the fillet so that you can clean away the
excess without disturbing the fillet. Figure 11-21 shows
a plastic-tipped filleting tool that has worked particu-
larly well to form very smooth surfaces on the fillet.
Clean up of the fillet begins with careful removal of
excess material. Usually a 1" (25mm) putty knife or the
beveled end of an 804 Mixing Stick is used in conjunc-
tion with a paper cup or can. Carefully scrape away
the excess from either side of the fillet and then
deposit it in the container by wiping the side of the
knife on the container edge. Repeat this procedure
until all of the excess has been removed as shown in
Figure 11-20.
After the fillet has begun its cure and started to stiffen
(anywhere from 30 minutes to 2 hours depending on
fillet size, temperature, and hardener speed), you can
do some further smoothing of the fillet surface with
more passes of the fillet stick. A rough fillet surface
or protruding edges can be smoothed considerably,
especially if you catch the fillet at just the right stage
in the cure cycle. This saves a lot of sanding later on.
When the fillet has achieved a full cure, you can, of
course, sand it as smooth as desired, but this is hard
work, especially with a high-density fillet. Fortunately, a
properly installed fillet should need very little sanding
to achieve adequate smoothness. Usually we use hand-
held 80-grit sandpaper for smoothing fillets, being
careful not to damage any wood grain on either side of
the fillet. When the fillet is completed, we always apply
one coat of unthickened epoxy over the entire fillet
surface. You can do this when you apply a coat of
epoxy to the general area. 
Chapter 11 – Laminating and Bonding Techniques
105
Figure 11-21 A simple plastic filleting tool that can be made
to the desired radius.
Plastic disc cut from a coffee can lid
and screwed to a scrap wood handle.
This tool was recommended to us and it
does a good job. The plastic discs can be
made to any radius and are easy to clean.
Figure 11-22 An alternative filleting tool can be made by
cutting an 808 Plastic Spreader with the desired fillet radius
and the adjoining sides at 75° angle. With an adequate amount
of thickened epoxy in the joint and by holding the tool at the
proper angle you can make a smooth fillet in one pass. The
sides of the tool will force all of the excess epoxy toward the
fillet and leave a clean margin on either side.

--- PAGE 120 ---
106
Core Boatbuilding Techniques

--- PAGE 121 ---
Scarfing remains an essential boatbuilding skill. This chapter has few changes from the 1985 edition. 
It does, however, discuss additional ways to cut scarfs in plywood.
It’s very difficult to buy lumber and plywood in the
right lengths for boat construction. When we do
manage to find wood that is long enough, it is usually
too expensive to consider. As a result, we’ve developed
our own scarfing procedures and use them to make
long boards, panels, plywood, and veneers out of
shorter ones.
Scarfing is a basic and essential boatbuilding skill.
When a well-made scarf is bonded with WEST SYSTEM®
epoxy, it can be as strong as the material it joins.
Desired lengths of lumber and plywood may be built
up with no increase in the width or thickness of the
material at the joint.
Although there are several different kinds of scarf joints,
we use only one, the simplest and most reliable. We
machine identical bevels at the ends of the pieces to be
joined, fit these matching bevels, and then permanently
bond them with epoxy. In many boatbuilding situations,
we use a ratio of 8-to-1 to determine the size of the
bevel, so that a 1" (25mm) thick board will have a
bevel 8" (200mm) long. When high-density, high-
strength wood is used in a critical area, a mast for
example, 12-to-1 proportions may be required. For
extra strength and safety, we increasingly recommend
12-to-1 scarfs for lumber.
The main object of the bevel is to develop enough
surface bonding area to exceed the strength of the
wood itself. If you have any doubts about the amount
of surface area needed with the wood you intend to
use, you can manufacture a sample joint and destruc-
tion test it. The sample does not have to be large: 12"
thick  1" (12mm  25mm) wide is sufficient.
Machine 8-to-1 bevels on two pieces and join them with
an adhesive mixture. When the epoxy has cured,
support the ends of the sample (well beyond the scarf
joint) and then apply force in the middle of the scarf
joint until it breaks. If failure occurs within the bond of
the scarf itself, you will have to increase its surface area
by increasing the scarf angle to a higher ratio for the
stock thickness.
The direction of the load on the scarf joint itself is of
little significance in comparison to the development of
bonding surface area to withstand that load. To develop
maximum surface bonding area with minimum waste
of material, you should bevel the side of the lumber
with the largest dimension. For example, if you had a
piece of 2"  4" (38mm  89mm) stock, no matter
what the load direction, you would make the 8-to-1
beveled joint on the 4" side rather than the 2" side.
Although the principles of scarfing lumber and
plywood are the same, the actual procedures differ.
In this chapter, we first discuss methods of scarfing
boards and then move on to a discussion of plywood
scarfs. We rarely scarf veneers for boats, but when we
do, we follow the basic steps used with plywood.
Scarfing Lumber
Making scarf bevels by hand
Depending on the size and type of lumber, you can 
use a variety of hand tools to cut bevels. Other methods
of beveling are faster, so we make bevels by hand only
on large stock or when we have just a few pieces to
work on.
Check to make sure that the end of your board is
sawed square with its length. Plan the bevel dimensions
carefully and mark them on the end of the board.
Measure the length of the bevel in from the squared
edge and, using a square, draw a line parallel to the
edge. This will represent the end of the bevel; it is
usually referred to as the bevel line. Draw diagonal
lines on each side of the board to connect the bevel
line with the squared edge on the opposite side.
Scarfing
C H A P T E R
12

--- PAGE 122 ---
Now remove excess stock to get close to the lines you
have drawn. There are many ways to do this: you can
make a careful cut with a sharp handsaw, sawing as
close to the marks as your skill will allow, or you can
use a wide chisel and mallet, a large plane with a deep-
set blade, or a power plane. When you have rough
machined the bevel close to its marks, use a sharp
block plane to finish it, watching the marked lines as
you proceed.
At this point, place the stock on a flat surface such as a
workbench with a block under the feather edge of the
bevel which can support the edge but will not interfere
with the hand planing. Continually check the bevel for
flatness in both directions so that when you plane the
bevel to its final marked lines, you leave a fine, feath-
ered edge at the very end of the stock. When you have
completed the scarf bevel, check to make sure that it is
flat in both the length and widths planed—we just set
the edge of the plane on the bevel surface for a quick
check. This ensures a totally flat surface, which will
mate properly with another scarf bevel to form a
dimensionally accurate and strong scarf joint.
The scarfing jig
To save time, you can easily build a jig on which to
mass produce accurate scarf bevels on various sizes of
straight lumber. Our basic scarfing jig design, shown in
Figure 12-1, operates on the same principle as a miter
box. A typical miter box is really only useful for cutting
45° bevels, but this jig can produce the angles of cuts
needed for 8-to-1 and 12-to-1 bevels.
The final dimensions of the jig are determined by the
stock to be beveled, but we always have made ours a
little larger so that we can bevel a reasonable variety of
stock sizes on one fixture. Construct the jig by bonding
two upright fences onto a flat base, making the fences
and base long enough to support the stock being cut.
Cut a mortise into the bottom of one of the fences of
the jig to receive a wedge, which will hold the stock
firmly against the opposite fence. Then lay out the
bevel angle accurately and mark it on the jig, being
extremely careful to make sure that the sawing line is
perpendicular to the jig floor so that you will produce
square bevels. Make the first saw cut into the jig, using
a back saw or a carefully controlled panel saw. This first
cut is crucial to an accurate jig. Test its accuracy by
manufacturing several beveled joints and checking
them for squareness. Now you can use the jig to
manufacture scarf bevels by placing stock in the jig
and using a back saw or panel saw to make the desired
cuts. You may need to finish the bevels with a sharp
block plane.
You can also set up this scarfing jig on the table of a
radial arm saw. Clamp the jig to the table so that it is
angled slightly to the travel of the saw to produce the
exact bevel desired as you pull the saw blade through.
Clamp lumber in the jig and proceed to cut the bevel.
Although the set-up with the radial arm saw takes
longer, it vastly increases the speed at which you can
machine bevels. It is not unheard of to manufacture
over a hundred accurate bevels per hour when you
are well set up and organized.
The router method
Another method of making bevels is to use a router in
conjunction with a guide fixture. This has one advantage
over the scarf jig in that it has the capacity to cut bevels
in stock of a wider dimension range. The disadvantage
is that the basic fixture takes a little more time to
engineer and construct and is not so portable because
it must be aligned with a flat surface in order to be of
value. Usually this fixture is permanently attached at
the end of a long, flat surface, such as a workbench,
108
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 12-1 Basic scarfing jig.
Fence
Fence
Fence
Wedge
Stock
Base

--- PAGE 123 ---
and used when needed. Figure 12-2 shows the basic
components of this fixture and how it might be assem-
bled. There are a number of variations on this design,
but the basic principle, which is to provide guides
which direct the router across the stock and machine
the proper bevel, is the same. Move the router back and
forth across the bevel face, cutting as much stock as the
fly cutter bit and power of the router will allow. With a
sharp bit and accurate guides, you can produce a very
smooth and even bevel surface. An electric plane can
be substituted to perform in the same manner as the
router.
Bonding scarf joints 
A beveled scarf joint is only as strong as the bond
developed between the two mating pieces. Therefore,
the bonding and structural capacity of the adhesive
you use is absolutely crucial to successful joints. Over
a long period of time, WEST SYSTEM adhesive mixtures
have shown the ability to produce strong scarf joints
if proper bonding procedures are followed.
The quality of the fit between mating surfaces is another
important factor in successful scarfing. Although it is
possible to correct minor irregularities with a thickened,
gap-filling adhesive mixture, it is better to keep working
a joint until it fits well. To check the fit, clamp the two
pieces of stock together in a trial run. If the bevels mate
poorly, gaps will be immediately apparent and you can
fix them. Even if the bevels do mate properly, sight
down the joined pieces to make sure that there is no
bend at the scarf to indicate that the bevel angles do
not match. When you are satisfied with the joint, you
are ready to apply an adhesive mixture to the bonding
surfaces of both parts.
Beveled scarf joints present a unique bonding problem
because you are dealing primarily with end-grain wood.
Most bonding in wooden boatbuilding is between
side or flat grain wood, where tight cell structure limits
epoxy penetration into the wood fiber. End-grain wood,
in comparison, can be penetrated deeply by the bonding
adhesive. This penetration of adhesive far into the
wood in itself makes the joint stronger. However, deep
penetration can cause difficulties if so much adhesive
is drawn into the wood fiber that an adhesive-starved
joint develops. Then, serious voids can occur between
the mating surfaces, which may compromise the struc-
tural integrity of the joint. Once you understand this
problem, you can easily take preventive measures
when applying the epoxy.
There are several ways to apply epoxy to a lumber scarf
joint. The method of choice, outlined here, not only
helps to fill gaps, but also minimizes the chances that
the epoxy you’ve applied to fill gaps will be drawn into
the end grain during the curing process.
To bond lumber scarfs, mix a batch of WEST SYSTEM
epoxy and apply it, with no fillers, to both bevels. Let
this coating sit for five minutes, and then add 406
Colloidal Silica or another high-density filler. to the
epoxy in your pot. The consistency of this mixture
depends on the quality of your joint. Apply desired
quantities of thickened epoxy to both bonding surfaces.
The first coating will penetrate into the wood, increasing
the likelihood that the second coating will remain
close to the scarfed surface to bridge any minor voids.
Clamping scarf joints
To make accurate scarf joints, you need a long, flat
surface, such as a workbench or the floor, on which
you can assemble and clamp the bevel joints. After
you have applied the adhesive, bring together the two
pieces of stock you are joining so that their bevels
slowly meet, using slight pressure with your gloved
hands. Press them together firmly, squeezing out any
excess adhesive. Make sure that both pieces are flat on
Chapter 12 – Scarfing
109
Figure 12-2 A jig for cutting scarf bevels with a router.
Router and base
Jig mounted on bench
and constructed so
that pipes are aligned
parallel with the scarf
bevel
Stock
Bench
Router with
flycutter bit cuts
scarf on the stock

--- PAGE 124 ---
the surface, but pressed well together so that there is
neither over nor under matching of the bevels (See
Figure 12-3.) Determine straightness in the edge
dimension by feeling the edges of the scarf with your
gloved fingers or set up a straightedge on the flat
surface against which you can assemble the two pieces
of stock, thus ensuring straightness in both dimensions.
When you have lined up the scarf joint perfectly, locate
a staple along the edge of the scarf joint on one surface,
turn the stock over, realign the joint, and locate another
staple on the opposite surface in the opposite scarf
edge. These temporary locating staples hold the scarf
joint in proper position until you can apply clamping
pressure.
It is important that you clamp the joint firmly so that
good contact is made between the surfaces. However,
excessive clamping pressure is not needed and should
be avoided because it may pre-stress the joint unneces-
sarily. To facilitate cleanup, remove any excess epoxy
that has squeezed out of the joint before you apply any
clamping pressure. Then wrap the scarf joint in wax
paper or light polyethylene film to prevent inadvertent
bonding of the scarf joint with clamps or the flat
surface. Apply clamping pressure with any number of
clamps desired or make up simple clamping fixtures
utilizing wedges to apply even pressure over the entire
scarf joint. Often we insert a clamping pad between
the clamp and the stock being clamped to distribute
clamping pressure over more area and prevent clamp
marks from appearing in the face of the stock.
When manufacturing the planking, stringers, or
ribbands for a mold or hull, you will bond a great
many scarf joints in a short time. Just as we have
developed higher production methods to machine
scarf bevels, so have we developed techniques which
vastly speed up the scarf bonding procedure. When
making numerous scarfs with the same size stock, we
prepare and temporarily line up the joints and then,
rather than clamping them individually, apply adhesive
and clamps to a number of scarfs in one operation as
shown in Figure 12-4. The number of joints that you
can assemble at one time is limited by the assembly life
of your epoxy and the dimensional capacity of the
clamps or clamping fixtures you are using. While we
have clamped up to twenty scarf joints at once, it takes
a great deal of care to keep this many from shifting.
110
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 12-3 When bonding thin stock or more than one
scarf, take care to avoid overmatching the bevels (A) or
undermatching the bevels (B). Use wire brads or staples
to hold a bevel in proper alignment (C) and prevent slipping
during clamping.
Figure 12-4 Stringers being prepared for bonding and
clamping. Scarf bevels have been cut on both ends. This
set-up places scarfs close to each other to minimize the
number of clamps needed.

--- PAGE 125 ---
Production bonding needs to be well organized and
requires the cooperation of at least two people. First,
pre-sort the stock to be joined and lay out the individual
pieces on a flat surface opposite one another with each
of the beveled surfaces facing up and pointing toward
its mate. No doubt you will want to make up varying
lengths of scarfed material, and you should do your
planning at this stage to minimize waste when you are
actually assembling the scarfed stock on the boat.
When you have laid out and organized all of the stock,
establish a separate assembly area close by on a flat
surface and prepare the clamps and a staple gun which
shoots 38" (9mm) wide-crown staples. On the floor, lay
out wax paper or a polyethylene sheet that is somewhat
wider than the scarf joints themselves to prevent
inadvertent bonding. Make up the adhesive mixture
and apply it to all the upward-facing beveled surfaces,
following the application procedure previously described.
Move two matched pieces of stock to the prepared
assembly area and align their beveled bonding surfaces,
using the procedure previously described. After you
have inserted the locating staples, turn the stock up on
edge with the side of the scarf joint resting on the wax
paper or polyethylene sheet. Before you move another
pair of matched pieces into the assembly area, wrap a
roll of wax paper over the standing surface of the scarf
you have just lined up; this will create a barrier between
it and the next scarf joint when they are placed side
by side. Then lift this roll of paper up the side of the
second scarf joint so that you can nestle the third scarf
joint beside the second without any bonding occurring
between them. Continue weaving the roll of wax paper
back and forth between all the ensuing scarf joints you
line up.
When you have lined up all of the joints in this manner
and they are sitting on edge, position heavy pieces of
stock about twice the scarf length on each side of the
stack. These serve as clamping pads to distribute
pressure evenly. Position clamps at either end of the
pads to keep the joints from sliding apart when
pressure is applied to the scarf area. Use enough clamps
to apply sufficient pressur