tions in Chapter 20.
At this point, you should have a reasonably clear idea of
the shape and dimensions of the keel and stem, so you
can prepare stock to laminate the blank for the stem
and keel. You can laminate the stock to the exact thick-
ness desired, but you should always add a little extra
width to allow for trimming after the blank is
completed. While it is possible to save some stock by
varying the lengths, widths, and thicknesses of the
stock in the laminate, this is normally more compli-
cated than it’s worth because of the great amount of
planning and work involved in cutting out and properly
lining up all of the different size pieces. It’s more
practical to control the thickness of a keel or stem by
step tapering the wood along the length.
Make the keel and stem blanks a little longer than you
will actually need them. The scarf joint will use up some
of this surplus so plan for it. Since the forward tip of
the stem blank is usually fastened securely to the floor
or strongback in the set-up, extra stock beyond the sheer
line may be necessary. The keel blank should extend a
short distance beyond the transom to facilitate fairing.
Springback may complicate construction of both the
keel and the stem, and it can make proper alignment
difficult. In keels, springback can sometimes be so
slight that you can push the piece back into position.
Chapter 19 – Keels, Stems, and Sheer Clamps
209
Figure 19-2  The laminated stem for the proa Slingshot. The
extra blocking on the side of the stem is for the slight flare in
the bow. Note the set-up cable on the floor and the notch for
the cable in the stem at the lower left corner of the photo.

--- PAGE 224 ---
Stem laminations are usually thicker and may present
greater springback problems. If it’s impossible to push a
stem into shape, you may have to laminate extra stock
onto one side and plane away wood from the other to
regain the designed curve.
Laminating Forms
The stem may be the largest and most difficult laminated
piece in your hull. It’s also usually one of the first lam-
inated components you’ll need. Practice with a dry run
before applying WEST SYSTEM® epoxy to the stem blank.
We usually lay out and bond stem blanks on the floor,
using triangular blocks to make a form as described in
Chapter 11. Take care to avoid any twisting in the
laminate. The stem is aligned along the centerline of a
boat so any distortion will complicate marking the
centerline and positioning the stem in the set-up.
Triangular blocks may also be used to laminate keel
blanks. We often laminate keels right on our set-ups,
using mold frames as forms. The difficulty with this 
is that the laminating stock is usually wider than the
trimmed keel will be, so the lamination must be
completed before any notches for the keel can be cut in
the permanent or mold frames. The trick is to work out
an adequate form without damaging the mold frames.
We recommend the following procedure in this situa-
tion. Measure up from the bottom of the marked keel
notch enough to clear the notch. Draw a line across the
frame, parallel to the base of the notch. Mark all frames
in this way and saw them off flush with these lines.
Screw or clamp 11⁄2" (38mm) square cleats or blocks 
to the control sides of all mold frames. Clamp them to
permanent frames. These will be points that you can
clamp to the keel blank. Include limber holes at the
frame/keel joints by cutting notches a little wider than
needed for the keel blank. Be careful not to remove so
much stock that the frame becomes too weak to support
and outline the hull shape. On thick keels, limber holes
that do not extend the full depth of the notches can
work effectively.
You may need temporary jigging aft of the transom and
up around the bow for laminating to help coax the keel
blank into bending as it approaches these areas. This
jigging can consist of a temporary addition to a bow
frame and a partial frame just aft of the transom.
Because of springback, it’s often a good idea to slightly
overbend the keel toward the bow and stern.
When the keel lamination is in position, clamp it
securely at each station point, covering each station
with polyethylene sheeting to keep epoxy from dripping
onto permanent members and accidentally bonding the
keel to the mold forms. Use clamps at each edge of the
keel to hold it to the blocks on the mold frame. To be
sure that there is adequate clamping pressure on the
laminate between stations, use hand clamps with
clamping pads to spread the load. Remove any epoxy
that squeezes out of the lamination.
Joining Keel and Stem Blanks
Mark centerlines and station lines on the stem and keel
blanks while they are still in the set-up. To mark the
interior of the stem, hold a plumb bob under the stem
and drop it to the centering cable. Mark the location
from which the plumb bob falls straight to the cable at
intervals along the stem and draw a line with a batten
to connect the marks.
Use a level to lay out station lines and any other frame
locations perpendicular to the centerline. Then mark
the widths of the keel and stem on their respective
blanks. Rough plane the side edges of the blanks to
these dimensions, but wait to taper any thickness until
after the pieces have been joined. Place the keel/stem
template on the blanks or take them to the lofting.
Transfer all reference lines and marks for the scarf.
210
First Production Steps
Figure 19-3  Set-up for the 42' (12.8m) Golden Dazy. The
keel can be seen on sawhorses beyond the molds. The slight
rocker in this hull allowed the use of a solid keel.

--- PAGE 225 ---
Cut scarf bevels on both blanks and join them in the
set-up to check for proper alignment. If the angles don’t
match almost perfectly, work with them until they do.
We usually allow a little extra length in scarf joints to
allow for this bit of fitting: if the bevel does fit the first
time, we remove the excess length.
We generally bond the scarf joint in the set-up, with
both keel and stem lined up in position. Once the bevels
are cut correctly, you can clamp the joint anywhere, but
to avoid any longitudinal distortion be careful to make
sure that the centerlines of the two pieces line up.
When the keel and stem are a single unit, prefinish the
portions which will show on the hull’s interior. Plane
and sand the surface smooth and round any edges.
Apply two or more coats of WEST SYSTEM epoxy to the
prepared surface and lightly sand it before installing it
in the set-up.
The final step in making the keel/stem unit is machining
bevels on the surfaces to which planking will be bonded.
It’s possible to do this using lofted measurements, but
the job is easier in the set-up, where the controlling edges
of mold frames can act as guides in determining angles.
Notching Frames
When the keel and stem are joined and shaped, cut
notches in the frames to receive the unit. The width and
depth of the notch in any frame are determined by the
dimensions of the keel/stem at this station. Lay out these
measurements on the frames and cut the notches as
accurately as possible. The bevel of the notch will be the
same as the bevel of the frame in the area of the notch.
Good fits between the keel/stem and mold frames are
essential wherever the assembly is attached to permanent
frames. In areas where the keel is a single thickness, use
a long batten to check the fairness of keel notches in
the mold frames. We often insert the keel/stem in
position to check the notches for depth and width. The
stem usually crosses only one or two frames. After that,
it’s unlikely that it will be notched in place. Instead, it
will sit on top of a flattened area which is machined at
the correct height on the mold frame.
Installing the Keel/Stem in the Set-Up
Join the keel/stem to the frames at every station in the
set-up. Bond the unit to permanent members with a
thick mixture of epoxy and high-density filler. Draw the
pieces together with clamps if they reach easily around
the frames, or drill holes and run screws through the
keel and into the frames. If you use screws, remember
to remove them after the joint has cured so that they
won’t be in the way of beveling. Fill the drilled holes
during finishing. To reduce sanding, remove any epoxy
that squeezes out of the joint.
Chapter 19 – Keels, Stems, and Sheer Clamps
211
Figure 19-4 A laminated stem scarfed to a solid keel. Note
the stringer bonded to the stem.
Figure 19-5 The keel/stem assembly is fit to molds for the
32' (9.7m) Hot Flash. Molds are notched so the keel lies flush
with the control face of the mold. Note the blocking used to
secure the keel/stem assembly to the molds.

--- PAGE 226 ---
To anchor the keel/stem to mold frames, use blocks and
screws in somewhat the same manner as described
earlier for using the set-up as a laminating form. Screw
square blocks of appropriate dimensions to the control
side of the mold frames, making them even with the
bottom of the notched-out area and holding them in
place with several screws and perhaps some adhesive, 
if needed. Drill each of these blocks for one screw
(although you can use several if necessary) and insert
the screw upward through the block and into the
interior side of the keel. Use a washer to keep the head
of the screw from pulling through the block. Do not
insert the screw so far that it will interfere with
machining that will be done on bonding surfaces. Later,
when the hull is completed, you will need to remove
these screws so that the keel and hull will come free
from the mold frames.
You will need jigging to position the tip of the stem so
that it will not move during beveling. You can use the
excess length that has been left on the stem blank
beyond the sheer line as an attachment point for this
jigging. After the planking has been applied, you can
saw the stem flush with the sheer line measurement.
Beveling the Keel and 
Stem to Receive the Planking
After the keel and stem have been securely positioned
in the set-up, mark them for beveling. We usually use a
handsaw for this procedure. Saw into the keel, using
the saw blade to represent a fair extension of the
control edge of the mold frame. Make another similar
saw cut an inch or so away and remove the material
between these cuts with a chisel. Fair the bevel with the
mold frame itself. Repeat this procedure at every station
on each side of the keel. Use a long plane to cut away
the stock between the mold frames until the keel is
planed down to the bevels already cut at each station
position. For large keels, a power plane can save a lot of
time and work. Take great care not to develop any
hollows between stations and lay a batten along the
length of the keel to make sure that you are
maintaining overall fairness. If you do develop any low
spots or you find that the keel lamination was a little
shy in some areas, you can bond another layer of
veneer or thin plywood in this low area and then fair it
to the desired level.
Stems are a little more difficult to bevel for several
reasons. First, you can only rely on one or two mold
frames to act as guides for beveling. Secondly, the bevel
is usually a much more severe V-shape that requires
considerable removal of stock. To complicate matters,
only that area of the stem close to the waterline may in
fact be V-shaped. Higher up in the hull (or close to the
sheer line) the stem may become flat on the forward
surface. The flat on the stem will be extended to its
final dimension with a laminated cap that covers both
the stem and planking as shown in Figure 19-1.
The cross section of the stem blank is more rectangular
than the desired final shape. When you jig the stem
into position, locate it by positioning the centerline on
the back of the stem over the centerlines on any
stations or jigging that it crosses. When the stem is
positioned accurately, mark it with all of the dimensions
needed for beveling. Usually, the most important
measurements are the control lines drawn on the face of
the stem. The control line(s) may be just a centerline,
or, if the stem will have some flare, two lines delin-
eating each corner. See Chapter 16 for detailed
discussion of how the stem dimensions are developed.
212
First Production Steps
Figure 19-6 The laminated keel for Rogue Wave bonded to
frames. The keel is ready to be faired. The frame crossing the
centerboard slot will remain uncut through the planking
process to prevent any distortion of the keel from stresses
created during planking. The centerboard case was installed
after the boat was turned over because, in this case, it was
taller than the set-up allowed.

--- PAGE 227 ---
Begin by cutting the bevels on each side of the stem
down to the lines drawn on the front face of the stem.
Use a fairing batten to check the angle of the bevels as
you progress. For accuracy, lay the batten on the
controlling edges of the mold frames three to four
stations back from the stem. When the batten lies flush
on the stem bevel and meets the control lines drawn 
on the bevel face (this may be a perfect point along the
centerline), the stem is completed. Stem bevels can be
tricky because there is often a large angle change in 
a short distance, so you should make frequent checks
with a fairing batten along the entire stem dimension 
to avoid any over-beveling which could cause a
crooked stem. Sighting the stem from above the set-up 
or sighting along its length from the floor can help
you detect any unfairness that might develop as you
work. Also lay a short batten along the stem to check
for hollows.
Chapter 19 – Keels, Stems, and Sheer Clamps
213
Figure 19-7 A set-up for a typical IOR racer. Control lines have been drawn on the stem. Notches are cut in the keel at the
molds to determine bevels. The stem is blocked up to allow the centerline cable to pass freely underneath.
Keel and stem scarf
Clean out stock between
saw kerfs with chisel
Bearding line picked
up off the lofting
Using a batten,
carefully fair the
stem with molds and
dress the faying or
bonding surface with
a plane
Swell of the stem
for flair or flam
Centerline cable
Mold
Saw into the keel
along a projection
of the mold’s
control edge

--- PAGE 228 ---
The Keelson
Keels can take many shapes and forms. The design
shown in Figure 19-8 is one of the more successful
solutions to the problem of distributing high point
loading, as might be generated by a ballast keel, over
maximum area. This type of keel and keelson assembly
is basically a relatively lightweight I-beam with two
faces separated by blocking along the length of the
boat. Laminated floors and frames distribute load
athwartship.
Keelsons are usually made of dense woods with high
strength. Mahogany, for example, is a good choice. We
generally install keelsons after removing hulls from
their set-ups. The keelson is laminated over the floor
and core blocking to form a single unit.
The structural advantage of this keelson concept is
excellent longitudinal stiffness and strength at a light
weight. The major advantage, however, is the large
safety margin that this method of construction can
provide if you ground with a modern, fin-type ballast
keel. Grounding on a rock can produce severe loading
on the entire keel and adjoining structures as the aft
portion of the ballast keel is forced upward into the
hull. The beauty of the keelson concept is that the
complex is capable of absorbing a great deal of energy
by putting the bottom keel and hull skin in compres-
sion and the keelson in tension, which is wood’s
strongest property. Often, a severe grounding will cause
the keelson to break in tension. It will absorb tremen-
dous amounts of energy in the process with the positive
result that no other part of the boat is damaged. The
214
First Production Steps
Figure 19-8 Detail and cross section view of a keel and keelson assembly. This design offers light weight and good distribution
of the high point loading of a ballast keel.
Laminated frame/floor
Keelson
Athwartship blocking
under frame
Limber hole
Keel
Ballast keel
Fore and aft keel blocking
Planking
Laminated 
floor timbers
Limber
holes
Keel
Planking
Blocking
Hardwood
keelson

--- PAGE 229 ---
keelson is relatively easy to repair by simply scarfing in
another piece in the area that has been fractured, and
the repair costs little in materials or labor hours. This is
a great savings when compared to the possible damage
that the hull itself might sustain without this arrange-
ment. (In two instances, large IOR boats that we have
built have had major groundings on rocks. In both
cases, the keelson concept worked beautifully, absorbing
most of the energy that was generated by the tremendous
grounding forces.)
Another structural advantage is that you can make the
lower keel itself much smaller than normal, permitting
laminated floors or ribs of the maximum size to pass
across the keel with the minimum amount of notching.
This provides excellent athwartship load distribution
and provides maximum usable headroom space in the
process. The keelson represents a very efficient use of
material and takes relatively few hours to manufacture.
Centerboard and Daggerboard Cases
Centerboard and daggerboard cases are, in effect, exten-
sions of the keel that provide a cutout for either a
centerboard or daggerboard to pass through. They are
also points of extreme high loading, and it is very
common for damage and leaking to occur in these areas
of the boat. Because of this, you should carefully build
up the keel in the area in which you install a case. To
do this, you might make the keel much thicker at this
point, using more cross-grain plywood laminations to
provide added resistance to splitting. Because a vast
majority of the loading on a case is generated in the
front where the slot protrudes through the keel, this
area can become one of the highest load points in the
entire boat structure. Therefore, you should make the
front of the slot especially strong to distribute this load
over as much area as possible.
Figure 19-10 illustrates our technique for building and
installing centerboard and daggerboard cases. Begin by
cutting a slot in the keel a little larger than the perimeter
of the case. Lightly bevel the slot, shaping it into a
wedge that tapers from a slightly wider top to a
narrower bottom. Insert the case into the cutout so that
it is flush with the bottom of the keel, plumb, and lined
up with the centerline.
Next, you must make sure that any epoxy you apply
will not drip immediately out of the keel/case joint.
Block the bottom of the case with a piece of wood or
tack a bead of epoxy along the joint line and allow it to
cure. We usually wrap thin plywood in plastic and
staple it to the keel, as shown in Figure 19-10, and find
that this not only prevents oozing but also helps to hold
the case in place. Because the plywood is wrapped in
plastic, it’s easy to remove when the joint has cured.
When the anti-drip device is positioned, pour an epoxy
mixture, slightly thickened with 404 High-Density Filler,
around the outer edges of the case to the full thickness
of the keel. Allow this to cure. To finish the case, apply
a cap and round over its edges. Fiberglass cloth can be
added as desired. We recommend that you apply it to
the corners where the boat and the case meet.
The method will result in a perfect structural fit
between the case and the keel, and this will effectively
transfer all loads to the keel. The chances of failure of
the joint between the case and the keel have been
minimized, so the possibility that the boat will leak
when it is in the water is greatly reduced.
Chapter 19 – Keels, Stems, and Sheer Clamps
215
Figure 19-9 The effect of grounding on the keelson. Shock
loads from grounding and the resultant forces on the keel cause
a tension break in the keelson at the back edge of the keel.
Shock loads from grounding and resultant
force on keel cause tension break in keelson
Grounding force

--- PAGE 230 ---
Laminating Sheer Clamps
We generally build up sheer clamps from two or three
long pieces of stock in much the same way as we
laminate keels. Any sheer clamp that is over 1" (25mm)
thick should be laminated. The sheer clamps on many
monohulls curve more than their keels and have more
twist over their length, a combination which results
from the flare of the hull toward the bow and leads to
reasonable concern that the clamp might split.
Use the set-up mold frames as a form for laminating the
sheer clamps, just as described for laminating the keel.
Firmly attach temporary cleats to both sides of all the
mold frames at the sheer so that you will be able to
clamp at each station. The cleats should be strong
enough to support the weight of many clamps all along
the sheer. (Clamp weight works in your favor on a keel
lamination, but against you when clamping a sheer
216
First Production Steps
Figure 19-10  Detail of a centerboard case construction and installation.
Figure 19-11 Laminating a sheer clamp over the outside of
mold frames. No notches have yet been cut in the molds.
When it has cured, the sheer clamp is removed, dressed and
prefinished. Then it is fit to notches in the molds.
Splitting stresses at the
forward end of the center-
board slot can be extreme.
Precautionary measures
such as cross-grain 
lamination in the keel, 
unidirectional fiberglass, or
bulkhead installation
counteract these forces.
Slot in keel relieved to allow
inspection as epoxy mixture
is forced in the joint.
Centerboard case ledge
Centerboard case
Keel
Fairing flap
Fiberglass tape
Temporary plate to prevent epoxy mixture run-out
Cap

--- PAGE 231 ---
clamp at about right angles to the floor.) If there is severe
twist in the sheer clamp, you may have to brace up the
mold frame to keep it from distorting.
It’s fairly easy to control unusually severe twist in a sheer
clamp by clamping a large stick perpendicular to it. This
gives you leverage on the sheer clamp. You can block
the outside end of the stick up or down to position the
sheer clamp at the desired twist, thereby removing a
great deal of stress from the mold frame. When the sheer
clamp lamination is completed, plane and sand all of its
interior surfaces and apply two or more coats of WEST
SYSTEM epoxy. Then notch the mold frames and install
the sheer clamp in the set-up, following the procedures
described for installing keels.
With the stringer-frame and strip plank methods of
laminating hulls, the sheer clamps are usually installed
in the set-up before planking. With the mold method
and sometimes with smaller strip-built boats, sheer
clamps are not generally necessary for hull construction
and you can install them later, when the hull is
completed. When you do this, be sure to use wood
clamping pads to prevent damage to the hull.
Chapter 19 – Keels, Stems, and Sheer Clamps
217
Figure 19-12 Considerations in the design of a sheer clamp.
Figure 19-13  A sheer clamp laminated on the outside of a
hull, using the hull as a mold. Note the clamping pad on the
outside to protect the cedar planking.
In any boat the scantlings and design of the sheer
joint depend on several factors:
1. The displacement of the boat.
2. The probable stresses the sheer as a whole (or in
part) will be subjected to.
3. The design of the framing system for the entire hull.
4. In the epoxy bonded boat, a careful balance of the
grain strength of the woods used and the bonding
area of the joint.
Dowels
resist
splitting
forces.
Bulkheads or gusseted
frames significantly
increase the strength
of the sheer joint.

--- PAGE 232 ---
218
First Production Steps

--- PAGE 233 ---
Hull Construction Methods
Chapter 20
Building a Mold or Plug
Chapter 21
Laminating Veneer Over a Mold or Plug
Chapter 22
Stringer-Frame Construction
Chapter 23
Strip Plank Laminated Veneer and 
Strip Composite Construction
Chapter 24
Hard Chine Plywood Construction
Chapter 25
Compounded Plywood Construction

--- PAGE 235 ---
A mold is a form over which veneer or plywood is laminated to create the desired hull or deck shape. The
mold provides a solid base on which to exert the pressure necessary to hold layers of veneer together until
the epoxy has cured. A mold allows one or several hulls to be built over it. Its biggest advantage is that
any number of identical shapes can be built from a single mold. The mold method of boat construction 
was popular in the early years of wood/epoxy boatbuilding but is used infrequently now.
Even though molds are now rarely used to build hulls of laminated wood, the construction techniques
described in this chapter are invaluable and are basic to custom and production fiberglass boatbuilding.
Production boatbuilders often build wood male molds which are then used to make the production 
female molds. The wood molds used this way are precisely finished, highly polished, exact replicas of 
the actual part. When used in this manner, a male mold is called a plug and is the basis of all production
boatbuilding.   
Builders of custom one-off boats also need to build molds, albeit not as highly finished as a plug, on 
which to construct the hull and other complex shaped parts. Keep in mind as you read this chapter that
laminating any complicated shape may require a mold, so don’t limit your thinking just to hull shapes. 
The deck, the cabin roof, cockpit liner, rudder, etc. can all be built using a mold.
Chapters 17 and 18 discussed making mold frames and setting up. This chapter draws on that information
and details how to build a male mold. 
The strengths and weaknesses of the mold method of
laminating hulls result from the mold itself. The process
of building a mold is time-consuming, and materials
may be expensive. Permanent parts, except for the keel
and stem, cannot be installed in the set-up, so the
technique is practical only on smaller, thick hulls with
little interior framework. When a hull is finished, you
have a choice between cutting up and discarding the
mold or storing it for years. On the other hand, the
mold method is hard to beat if more than one boat is to
be built. When a number of hulls are constructed
around a single plug, its costs are more than repaid in
labor savings alone.
Types of Molds
A mold is a form over which to laminate veneer or
plywood. It must accurately describe the shape of the
finished hull, and it must be strong enough to hold this
shape as you work. As long as it does these things, the
exact construction details of a mold may vary according
to the requirements of an individual project.
Molds may have solid surfaces, or they may be little
more than open lattices. The type of mold you need
will depend on a number of factors. Molds used for
many hulls or relied upon for exact tolerances must be
more substantial than molds used for a single boat. In
many cases, the kind of pressure used to hold layers of
laminate in place as the epoxy cures will determine the
nature of the mold.
We have used a wide variety of molds. When we built
Tornado catamarans, our goal was to turn out many
boats to exact specifications. We used vacuum bag
techniques to “clamp” our layers of veneer, so our mold
had to be airtight. We built a solid or planked plug,
edge gluing strip planks as we might on a boat hull.
This mold was rigid and fair, but to be sure that we
could move it around the shop without losing the hull
shape, we laminated a layer of veneer onto its surface.
Few molds are so sophisticated.
A simple lath or stringered mold is at the other end of
the spectrum. With this type, we set up frames and
then fasten ribbands, long stringers of wood, over the
Building a Mold or Plug
C H A P T E R
20

--- PAGE 236 ---
set-up. Gaps between ribbands may be wider than the
ribbands themselves so that only 40 or 50% of the
mold surface is solid wood. Because staples can only 
be inserted where there are ribbands, we mark the first
and second layers of veneer before fastening them. This
takes extra time, but since a ribband mold is quicker 
to build than a planked one, the balance may lie in its
favor when it will be used for only one or two boats.
Somewhere between these extremes lies the mold that
is adequate for laminating most hulls. The quality of 
a mold is most important as the first two layers are
laminated, when long staples are used to hold the
veneers snug against it. Staples may be inserted
anywhere in it, so a solid plug has a distinct advantage
during this stage. One less elaborate way to build a
strong, rigid planked mold is to laminate two layers 
of 1⁄8" (3mm) veneer over an open, stringer mold.
Production Boatbuilding Molds
Production boatbuilding molds come in two varieties
commonly referred to as male and female molds. Male
molds have convex surfaces and female molds have
concave surfaces. Parts built on male molds are smooth
on the inside surface (for example, a cockpit liner) and
rough on the outside. Parts built in female molds are
smooth on the outside (for example, a cabin roof) and
rougher on the inside.
When producing hundreds of boat hulls, it is important
to reduce labor costs, so these boats are built in female
molds so that the outside of the part comes out of the
mold finished. The opposite is true of parts built on 
a male mold. The inside is smooth and the outside
requires considerable labor to fair it and paint it.
Hence, a male mold is useful only for one-of-a-kind
boats.
Female molds are almost always built on a highly
polished plug because it is much easier to finish a
convex surface than a concave surface. 
Setting Up the Mold
The first step in manufacturing the mold is to set up
the frames and forms onto which you will assemble the
longitudinal ribbands. The principles of construction
and set-up for mold frames are discussed in Chapter 18.
The materials used to construct the mold frames must
be structurally adequate, cheap, and have an edge thick
enough to receive a fastener so that you can attach
222
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 20-1 Building female molds from a single plug. The fine polished finish on the plug transfers to the inside of the mold
and to the outside of the finished part.
Added framework and legs 
Top (deck) mold half
Plug
Top and bottom mold
halves are split at the
widest point of the plug
A temporary shelf
attached to the plug
gives a finished edge
to the molds
Bottom (hull)
mold half
Added framework
and legs 

--- PAGE 237 ---
the planking easily. When making the mold frames,
remember that you must not only deduct the planking
thickness of the hull, but also the planking thickness
that you will use on the mold. If the hull is to be 
1⁄2" (12mm) thick and the ribbands are to be 3⁄4" (18mm)
thick, you must deduct a total of 11⁄4" (30mm) planking
thickness from the lofting in order to arrive at properly
sized mold frames. Because of this unusually large
deduction, you must pay careful attention to the
planking thickness deduction procedure. (See 
Chapter 16 for a detailed discussion of lofting.)
Once you have properly set up the mold frames and
completed final fairing, you can begin planking the
mold. Although it is not always necessary, many
molded hulls are built with provisions in the mold 
to insert a permanent keel and stem which can be
removed with the hull from the mold. It is relatively
easy to insert a permanent keel into the mold and to
attach the veneers permanently to the keel during the
molding process.
If the keel is to be 4" (100mm) wide, leave a gap along
the centerline of the mold slightly over this width,
allowing approximately 1⁄8" (3mm) clearance between
each side of the keel and the mold. We run a perma-
nent ribband, which we call a keel runner, along each
side of the keel. This then becomes a joining point for
all the rest of the ribbands on the mold that would
intersect the keel at a diagonal angle. If the keel is
thicker than the ribbands, recess the mold frames
whatever extra distance is required so that the keel 
will fair up smooth with the ribbands on the mold
surface. (See Figure 20-3.)
Installing a permanent stem is somewhat more compli-
cated because you must construct the mold using an
inner mold stem on which the permanent stem will
repose during the laminating procedure. You need the
inner mold stem as a point on which to attach the
ribbands as they approach the bow stem area. This
interior mold stem must continue on up to the keel
area where the keel runners intersect so that every
ribband running in from the hull can either connect
with the inner mold stem or the keel runner. No
ribbands can be allowed to end at the stem or keel area
without being attached to one of these solid points. A
difficult part of this installation is to determine the exact
location and shape and size of the inner mold stem. To
determine this information, you will have to go to the
lofting board and work back from the outer stem area.
The location of the permanent stem itself might be
back a distance due to the effect of the planking and
stem cap that protrude out in front. Thus, from the
outer profile of the boat, you might have to deduct the
stem cap and the permanent stem before determining
Chapter 20 – Building a Mold or Plug
223
Figure 20-3  A mold with a recessed keel.
Figure 20-2 A plug for a 32' (9.7m) catamaran is polished
and waxed, ready for a mold to be cast. The mold for the
upper surface will be female in the areas of the hulls and
cabin top and male in the cockpit area.
Notch so keel may
sit fair with
surface of mold
Keel
runners
Keel
Ribbands 
faired and
secured to mold
Mold

--- PAGE 238 ---
the outer measurement of the mold stem assembly. (See
Figure 20-4.)
Even for molds where you will not be inserting a
permanent stem, you will still need to recess the actual
mold stem back further than the permanent stem
would be, and you can easily deduct these measure-
ments from the lofting board. You’re going to need
some room for stem assembly, whether it remains
attached to the mold or becomes a permanent part 
of the laminated hull. For example, if you’re using 3⁄4"
(18mm) square ribbands and they meet at the bow 
on a mold stem that is shaped to a perfect point, the
ribbands alone will still project a frontal flat area of 11⁄2"
(36mm). Thus, you will have to add some material
anyway, regardless of whether it will become a perma-
nent part of the mold or the hull. This is a practical
consideration to be thinking about when looking at the
lofting board and determining your positioning of the
mold stem piece. You should also keep in mind that a
permanent stem should be large enough to offer suffi-
cient surface area for a properly bonded joint. Thus 
the size or depth of the permanent stem will affect the
location of the mold stem.
Planking the Mold
The planking on both solid and stringered molds must
bend in even, fair curves as it is laid over the mold
frames. Knots and severe grain run-out will cause wood
to bend unfairly or even to break, so use high quality
lumber for stringers. When you consider the waste
which results from irregularities in lower grade stock,
high quality wood is really not significantly more
expensive. We usually use clear redwood, cedar, or
white pine for planking molds, but many other species
work well.
As soon as you have finished your lofting and before
you set up your mold frames, decide the thickness of
your ribbands. Subtract this measurement from the
frames just as you subtracted planking thickness. Most
commercially available lumber is already planed to 3⁄4"
thick, so we usually use 3⁄4" square ribbands. If they will
not bend easily over all curves, we laminate stringers
from thinner pieces or shift them around until they lie
well. If long boards are not available, we scarf the
ribbands before fitting them. Ribbands may be joined
with butt blocks, but we prefer scarf joints because they
take only a little more time and do not result in hard
spots.
We begin planking the mold by identifying its most
difficult curves. Some IOR racers, for example, have
unusually curved shapes to fit a particular rule. Since
these may be unnegotiable if approached from the
wrong angle, we save time and trouble by running our
first stringer so that it best negotiates all of them. This
is the master ribband, and from it we align all of the
other ribbands along the hull.
As you progress up and down the hull, ribbands
aligned with the master ribband may have to be reori-
ented to conform to other shapes. If your planking runs
primarily fore and aft, this problem is magnified by the
difference between the girth of the hull’s fat middle and
its thinner ends. Much more planking is needed in the
middle of the hull than at its ends. 
A simple solution to this is to leave larger gaps between
ribbands at the center than at the ends of the hull.
Slight variations in the distances between stringers will
very slowly change the direction in which they run.
This permits a gradual directional transition and allows
the planking to bend more easily around more difficult
curves. Be careful not to overdo this, however, because
224
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 20-4 Lofting and set-up of a mold/stem assembly.
The stem for this
male mold must be
lofted and built to
support the inner
face of the boat’s
stem. All dimensions
must be consistent
with the lofted lines
of the hull
Sheer
W.L.6
W.L.6
Inner face of stem
Profile of stem
Profile of stem
cap or cutwater 
Planking
Cap
Stem
Keel profile
Baseline/centerline
Cap
Stem
Planking
Mold
stem
Mold
ribbands
Profile of the boat’s hull
Keel runner
Ribbands 
are faired over
the molds and
mold stem, then
fastened securely
Mold
frames
Mold stem
Sheer

--- PAGE 239 ---
too much space between ribbands reduces potential
stapling area and may compromise the rigidity of the
mold.
It’s easy to reinforce a mold when it seems to be too
flexible. Short stringers can be inserted between longer
ones, as shown in Figure 20-6, if the gaps between
ribbands are too large. To provide additional support 
to ribbands midway between station frames, bond and
staple 2" (50mm) wide strips of thin plywood to the
inside of the mold. If you use extraordinarily thin
ribbands and therefore need additional reinforcement,
two or even three of these strips can be evenly spaced
between frames. A final and effective way to build
rigidity into a weak stringer mold is to cover it with a
layer or two of veneer and turn it into a solid mold.
Fastening Ribbands to Mold Frames
We generally fasten ribbands to mold frames with a
staple gun and narrow crown wire staples up to 11⁄4"
(30mm) long. Staple guns are fast and easy to use, and
air-powered models will jar the set-up much less than
hammering nails will. The staple gun automatically
recesses staples about 1⁄8" (3mm) below the surface, 
so they do not get in the way of fairing. This system
successfully fastens planking up to 3⁄4" (18mm) thick.
Nails are the second best fasteners for attaching
planking. If you use them, drill your planks first to
prevent splitting and to minimize the hammering
needed to drive them home. Use finishing nails,
recessing them to facilitate fairing. An air nailer with
18-gauge brad nails up to 2" (50mm) long also 
works well.
You may also use screws to attach ribbands to mold
frames, especially over sharp curves where additional
holding power is needed. Always drill a lead hole with
the proper size bit and countersink the screw. Self-
tapping screws are the best choice if you are working
with chipboard mold frames. We sometimes bond or
nail pieces of scrap wood to both sides of chipboard
frames, close to their edges, and staple or nail ribbands
to these rather than to the chipboard. This technique
may be quicker than drilling and inserting screws.
If a mold is to be at all permanent or if it will be
moved, we bond the ribbands to the frames with a
mixture of high-density filler and WEST SYSTEM® epoxy.
Occasionally, we do this after installing the ribbands,
running fillets on both sides of the joint between the
ribband and the mold frame. When we lay veneers 
over mold frames to make a solid mold, we edge-glue
them and make the entire mold a rigid, monocoque
structure.
If you are building a mold for use with the vacuum bag
method of applying pressure, your prime requirement 
is that the mold be airtight. You must maintain this
airtightness even though you have driven staples into
the mold and removed them numerous times. You need
a few staples to hold the veneers in general position
Chapter 20 – Building a Mold or Plug
225
Figure 20-5  The ribbands for this 26' (7.9m) mold were run
parallel to the sheer and butted along the centerline of the
keel.
Figure 20-6 A ribband mold for an IOR 1⁄2 ton racer. Note
the use of shorter ribbands to fill gaps between full-length
ribbands. The skeg shown was laminated out of veneers
beforehand, then secured to the mold. The veneer used to
plank the hull was bonded to the skeg. This was done to
save the extra expense and time of molding such an
extreme shape during general laminating.

--- PAGE 240 ---
until you can apply the vacuum bag. This means that
the mold material must be reasonably thick. We have
built ours using edge-glued strip planking over which
we diagonally bonded one layer of 1⁄8" (3mm) veneer.
This made a substantial mold, which held up well after
manufacturing many units. For vacuum bagging, you
should install a flange on the mold below the actual
sheer clamp area, extending out approximately 2"
(50mm) around the entire perimeter of the mold. The
flange serves as a point where you can seal off the
vacuum bag itself, and also provides an apex area
where the flange meets the mold surface so that you
can install piping with which to remove the air between
the vacuum bag and the mold. If any permanent stems
or keels are to be inserted into this type of mold, pay
attention to these recessed areas to make sure that no
air leaks at these points.
Whatever type of mold you build, you must complete
final fairing prior to beginning the lamination process.
Any unwanted humps or hollows will tend to be dupli-
cated in the laminating process, and you are far better
off removing them from the mold than trying to do it
later by removing needed material from the hull or
adding unwanted extra weight in filler material. Use 
the same final fairing techniques described for hulls in
Chapter 21 to fair the mold surfaces.
Finishing the Mold
When you have completed the final fairing, it’s time to
pay attention to several other items. Sheer measure-
ments are still located on the mold frames and ultimately
will be transferred to the hull itself. The easiest way to
do this is to run a ribband directly on the frame marks
that define the sheer. This will be a straight, accurate
edge you can use later to scribe the hull before lifting 
it from the mold. Because laminating pressure will be
needed a bit beyond the actual sheer, add ribbands
beyond this line. Usually an additional 1" or 2" (25mm
or 50mm) of stringers is adequate. Leave a 1⁄4" to 1⁄2" 
(6mm to 12mm) gap between the sheer stringer and 
its neighbor to make room for marking the hull.
Another method for marking the sheer is to drill small
marking holes through the mold at each mold frame
sheer measurement point prior to laminating the hull.
This procedure leaves a little to be desired if you are
trying to maintain exact tolerances, but you can line up
these holes and check them on the mold using a lofting
batten to see whether they form a reasonably fair sheer
line. If they are accurate, drill through the pilot hole
into the completed laminate to transfer the sheer
measurements and then use the lofting batten to
complete the sheer measurement on the laminated hull
by connecting all of the drilled holes after you remove
the hull from the mold.
If you are going to insert a permanent keel and stem
into the mold, you must laminate them (if needed) and
226
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 20-7  An epoxy/low-density filler mixture was applied
near the bow for fairing.
Figure 20-8  A marking gauge and batten arrangement for
transferring the sheer line from the mold to the hull.
Planking
Mold
ribbands
Sheer
height
These
ribbands
must be
positioned
accurately
Marking gauge

--- PAGE 241 ---
saw them to shape. You might even prefinish them on
that part that would show on the interior of the com-
pleted laminated hull, saving some time later on. It is
usual to scarf and join together the keel/stem complex
right in the mold and final fair them after they are
solidly secured in position. Hold them in this secure
position by installing screws from the interior of the
mold, usually through a cleat that is attached to the
mold frame. Locate these screws in an easy access area
so that you can back them off when the hull is com-
plete and ready for removal from the mold. Complete
the final shaping and fairing of the keel/stem complex
to the mold surface, using the techniques that we have
explained in Chapter 19.
With some types of laminated hulls, it is also possible
to include the permanent transom in the mold set-up.
You can only do this if the transom does not have any
reverse slope or if the hull does not have any reverse
slant. Either of these would prevent removal of the
laminated hull from the mold. It is rather easy to install
a permanent transom by temporarily attaching it to the
mold transom, to which the ribbands are already
attached. The transom might be prelaminated or might
simply be a sheet of plywood. You may have laminated
on some additional cleats to create more bonding area,
which should not cause any problems. Once you have
positioned the transom, fair it off flush with the general
mold surface, just as was done with the keel/stem
complex. When permanent transoms are not set in, it is
usual to extend the mold transoms an 1" or 2" (25mm
or 50mm) to allow a little extra length for trimming.
Prior to beginning any laminating over a mold, take
steps to ensure that you will be able to remove the
laminated hull from the mold when it is complete. To
prevent any bonding of the laminations to the mold, we
generally cover the entire mold surface with a layer of
polyethylene sheet, usually 4 to 6-mil thickness, using a
new sheet for each hull produced. For molds that do
not have any permanent keels, stems, or transoms
inserted, it is a simple matter to cover the entire mold
with plastic. For molds that do have these permanent
inserts, you must insert the plastic around these struc-
tural members so that permanent bonding between the
laminations and the permanent members can take
place. Usually you can tuck the polyethylene sheet film
in between the slight gaps that will exist between the
permanent members and the mold itself. If this is
somewhat difficult, relax the screws holding these
permanent members in place just a bit so that you can
insert the plastic under or beside them. This will
provide the necessary barrier so that you do not bond
the lamination members to the wrong part. When you
have completed this step, you are ready to begin the
process of building the laminated hull with the mold
method.
Chapter 20 – Building a Mold or Plug
227

--- PAGE 242 ---
228
Hull Construction Methods

--- PAGE 243 ---
This chapter describes in detail the process of laminating layers of thin wood veneer over a mold or plug
such as those described in the previous chapter. The process of laminating veneers is more commonly
known as cold molding, and what follows is one of the best available descriptions of the process. While
popular in the early years of wood/epoxy construction, the cost of building a throw-away mold, the inability
to include interior structure in the set-up, and labor required make cold molding less attractive than other
methods of boat construction. Cold molding is still utilized in conjunction with strip plank construction on
larger boats.
When the mold is faired, it’s time to begin planking.
Your plans will specify the number of layers of veneer
or plywood the hull requires. Although this count may
vary from project to project, laminating techniques do
not. A hull may be made of sliced veneer, plywood, or
stock which you have sawn yourself. In this chapter, for
simplicity, we use the term veneer to refer to all of
these materials.
The general procedure for laminating hulls over a mold
is not complicated. If your wood doesn’t have a single
straight edge, you will have to cut one. Then spile each
piece, trimming it so that it lies true against its neighbor
at a desired angle, apply thickened epoxy, and staple it
to hold it in place until the epoxy has cured.
The first layer of a laminated hull is the most fragile.
Edge glue its pieces and staple them directly to the
mold. Carefully remove excess adhesive and staples.
Use thickened WEST SYSTEM® epoxy to laminate a
second layer of wood at an angle to the first and staple
through the first layer to the mold. Continue laminating
in this way, stapling subsequent layers to each other but
not to the mold until the hull is as thick as you want it.
Fair it, finish it, and remove it from the mold.
Preparing the Stock
You can use any of several different types of wood to
laminate your hull. In most cases, boatbuilders use 1⁄8"
(3mm) commercially sliced veneer, but you may choose
plywood or saw the lumber yourself. The first step is 
to make sure that every piece has one straight and true
edge. Later in this chapter, when we discuss spiling, 
the reasons for this will be apparent.
Plywood has a manufactured straight edge accurate
enough to require no further trimming. Veneer,
Laminating Veneer Over a Mold or Plug
C H A P T E R
21
Figure 21-1 A method for cutting a straight edge on veneers.
Clamp
1" X 8" Straightedge
Veneer
Rough edge
Circular saw
Sawn edge
Veneer
2" X 12" Base

--- PAGE 244 ---
however, usually arrives with rough sawn edges, which
must be straightened. Over the years, we have devel-
oped a quick and easy way to work on a number of
pieces of veneer, up to 17' (5m) long, at one time. 
We set up our cutting jig on three sawhorses, storing 
it when it’s not needed.
Lay four to eight pieces of veneer on a 2"  12" (38mm
 286mm) plank so that their rough edges are slightly
inboard from the plank’s edge. Make a straightedge
from a piece of clear 3⁄4"  8" (18mm  200mm)
stock, carefully dressing the edge for overall straight-
ness. Position this on top of the veneers to serve as a
guide for a hand-held circular saw. Try to waste as little
wood as possible, but place the straightedge far enough
back from the edges of your veneers to guarantee that
you will be able to transfer a straight line to all your
pieces. Sandwich the veneers between the straightedge
and the plank and hold the assembly with large clamps
at either end. Tighten the clamps so the veneers can’t
shift.
Set your circular saw blade deep enough to cut through
all the veneers. A little overcut into the plank is accept-
able. Run the saw along the stack, as shown in Figure
21-1. When your pieces have one accurate edge, cut
parallel straight edges on their other sides. The easiest
way to do this is to run the veneers through a table saw.
Some very long veneers taper significantly from one
end to the other. Truing these up results in a lot of
waste, especially since you can use them for interior
layers of the laminate by alternating the tapered ends
from piece to piece so that there is no angle change.
When we receive tapered veneers, we use our straight-
ening jig on both sides rather than just on one.
Two factors determine the width of laminating material:
the amount of compound curve in your hull and how
you want your boat to look. You can use much wider
pieces of veneer at the ends of your boat, where there 
is less compounding, than in its middle sections, where
curvature is likely to be more severe. Most people
prefer uniform veneer widths on naturally finished
interior and exterior surfaces, but this is not particularly
necessary. Thin pieces or, less commonly, wide pieces,
can be very pleasing to the eye when arranged so that
their colors contrast.
Most commercial veneers are between 5" and 12"
(125mm and 300mm) wide after straightening. Wait 
to saw them into thinner strips until you have experi-
mented enough to know which width will bend and
look best on your hull. It’s a shame to saw 12" (300mm)
wide veneer into three 4" (100mm) strips when two 6"
(150mm) strips may bend just as well with much less
labor. You will find out very quickly if your veneers 
are too wide. If they are, the edges will be increasingly
difficult to hold down as the pieces resist bending in
two directions at once.
Sort the veneers into piles according to their quality and
color. Collect your finest pieces and save them for your
first and last laminations, particularly if you plan to
bright-finish your hull. Further sort this pile into dark,
medium and light-toned pieces. Some woods, such as
Douglas fir and Sitka spruce, show very little color
variation, while others, including Western red cedar
and some of the mahoganies, have a great deal. Knotty
veneers can be used on all but the first and last layers.
In most cases, 25% of the material you purchase will
end up as scrap and only 75% will actually become
part of your boat. Most waste is in length because small
cut-off ends are almost useless. It makes sense, there-
fore, to try to reduce your scrap rate by ordering veneer
in the most economical lengths for your project. If you
do this, however, you may find that your supplier is
unable to fill your order. He probably doesn’t have
much control over the lengths of wood he purchases.
The opposite approach—making decisions based on
what is available—is usually more successful. A typical
boat hull requires a range of veneer lengths, from very
short to very long. These dimensions depend to some
extent on the angle at which you laminate. You may wish
230
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 21-2  A ribband mold for a 1⁄2-ton racer showing
alignment markings for various veneer layers.

--- PAGE 245 ---
to work with this angle and your stock until you find
the most efficient use of the veneers you have on hand.
You can greatly cut down on scrap by butt joining or
scarfing shorter pieces of veneer. In thick laminates,
butts are perfectly acceptable as long as they are
staggered across and through the structure. Wood is
many times stronger in tension than it is in compres-
sion, and a properly bonded butt joint can transmit
100% of all compression loads. Wood’s excess tensile
strength permits the use of butt joints with a good
degree of safety in a hull with many laminations.
When a hull has only two or three layers of veneer,
however, we recommend that you choose 8-to-1 scarf
joints instead of butt joints. Use the Scarffer™ attach-
ment and the plywood scarfing techniques described in
Chapter 12 to cut your bevel. Assemble and bond the
joint right on the mold. For accurate fits of both butts
and scarfs, remember to cut the ends of your veneers
exactly flush at right angles to their straightened sides.
Inserting and Removing Staples
Successful lamination is closely related to your expertise
with a staple gun. Staples are used on every layer to mold
veneers in place until the epoxy has cured, so you will
shoot and remove a great many of them. Master several
easy techniques before you take aim at your hull.
There are several things to think about as you staple
layers of veneer: the orientation of the staple with respect
to the grain of the wood, the pressure pattern applied
by each staple, and if and how you will extract the staple.
As you work you exert pressure, which the staple
maintains.
For maximum holding power, always insert staples so
that their crowns are perpendicular to the grain of the
wood. This will also reduce any damage the staples may
do to wood fiber, so it will save some filling on the last
layer. Staple holes parallel to the grain are much less
noticeable than those which run across the grain.
Chapter 21 – Laminating Veneer Over a Mold or Plug
231
Figure 21-3  Veneers in interlaminate layers of this laminated hull are butted randomly. This reduces scrap and eases lay up
without sacrificing the strength of the hull. Note the final layer of veneer being laid fore and aft at the lower left.

--- PAGE 246 ---
When a staple is inserted into a piece of veneer, it creates
an oval area of pressure, but when it is inserted into a
piece of plywood, the pressure area is more circular.
These patterns are caused by the direction of the wood
fiber: plywood is bidirectional, so pressure is distrib-
uted more evenly than it is in unidirectional veneer. The
shapes of these pressure areas determine the most effec-
tive stapling patterns to use in laminating. We
recommend the patterns shown in Figure 21-4 for use on
the flat sections of a hull. Note that plywood usually
requires fewer staples than veneer.
Planking thickness and the curve to which you are
bending your wood may also affect the number of
staples needed for good bonding. Thin veneers require
more staples than thicker planking. At the midpoint of
a heavily curved hull, a veneer’s natural resistance to
bending exerts a good deal of pressure, so you can
insert relatively few staples. At either side of this sharp
curve, however, the veneer will tend to bend away from
the mold and more staples will be necessary. Sometimes,
for particularly sharp curves, you may want more pres-
sure than can be exerted by the staples you’re using. In
these situations, use longer staples or hammer nails
through a heavy strip of wood to distribute pressure.
We generally begin a stapling pattern in the center of a
veneer. Applying pressure here first helps to work
excess epoxy out towards the edges. If you staple edges
and then centers on any but the first layer, you may
trap pools of epoxy in the center of the veneer, and this
may cause it to become unfair. When you apply unusu-
ally wide pieces, it is especially important to work out
from the center because this is the only practical way to
move excess epoxy from within the lamination.
We usually use 3⁄8" (9mm) or 1⁄2" (12mm) long wide
crown staples to fasten the first two layers of 1⁄8" (3mm)
veneer to the mold. These staples must be removed
before new laminations are installed or it will be very
difficult to free the hull from the plug. We also often
extract staples used to attach veneer to permanent
232
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 21-4 Recommended stapling patterns.
Staple veneer in staggered
rows roughly 11⁄2" (38mm)
apart with the staples
spaced 2" (50mm)
in the rows.
Pressure under a staple will vary from veneer to plywood.
Due to its grain, veneer will produce an exaggerated oval
pressure area. Plywood because of its balanced lamina-
tions will have a more circular pressure distribution.
The thickness of the planking
as well as the curve you are
bending it to will affect the
stapling pattern.
Obviously common sense will dictate
the stapling pattern. The basic
intent should be to prevent flow 
of the epoxy under the veneer
causing lumps and ridges. 
The more staples you put 
in, the more staples you 
will have to remove.
Thick planking and areas
of severe curve (unless
compounding occurs) will
need less.
Veneer
Staple plywood in a
rough 2" grid
Plywood
Thin veneers and flat areas
or sections with reverse
curve will need more staples.

--- PAGE 247 ---
members such as the stem and keel, although these
may be left in place if corrosion-resistant types are used.
From the third layer on, we use shorter staples, say 3⁄8"
(9mm) or 5⁄16" (8mm) long for three layers of 1⁄8" (3mm)
veneer, because we are no longer stapling into the
mold. Since these staples will not penetrate beyond the
first layer and will not interfere with the mold, they do
not have to be extracted. We do, however, pull out
staples used on the final, exterior lamination.
You can use steel staples, but plan to remove them. If
you don’t want to pull them out, use Monel or plastic
staples (plastic staples require a special staple gun). We
have left steel staples in our own boats with no problems,
but steel staples may rust if the hull or the protective
coating around them is damaged. Monel staples are
more expensive than steel, but their cost is more than
offset by the reduced risk of corrosion and by the labor
savings which result from leaving staples in place.
If you use Monel staples and do not remove them, be
sure to adjust your staple gun so that it shoots the
staples slightly recessed into or flush with the veneer.
Otherwise, difficulties can develop when you try to fair
the surface in preparation for the next layer of wood. If
protruding staples interfere with laminating, grind them
flush with power tools when you rough fair your hull.
As you build, you will remove a good many staples. To
make this job easier, staple through a strip of material,
leaving a tail you can grasp to yank out your fasteners.
For most applications, we use inexpensive 1⁄2" (12mm)
wide, .030" (.8mm) thick plastic banding tape. We 
cut this to length, usually 3' to 6' (1m to 2m), tuck 
the pieces in our belts, and pull them out as needed,
perhaps four or six strips on a 6" (150mm) wide
veneer. When our veneers are very long, it’s more
efficient to cut and handle strips that are half the length
of the veneers. The plastic is so strong that even when
we staple through it, we only have to tug at it to pull it
and many staples free. We remove staples from our
banding and reuse it.
Chapter 21 – Laminating Veneer Over a Mold or Plug
233
Figure 21-5 More staples are necessary to hold down thin
veneers in a reverse or concave area near a skeg. Note the
reasonably regular stapling patterns employed on planking in
the foreground.
Figure 21-6 Recommendations for staple length.
Figure 21-7  Stapling veneer plank to a hull’s stringers. Note
the use of plastic strips under the staple heads to ease
removal.
First 2 layers of veneer will require
longer staples to hold the planks
together and to the molds
Planking veneers
The third layer of veneer
should only require 3⁄8" or
5⁄16" staples to hold it down
to the previous layers
This should reduce the number
of staple holes punched
through the inner layer

--- PAGE 248 ---
At times, particularly on final layers of laminate, other
materials serve better than plastic banding. Wooden
mixing sticks, scrap veneer, thin rippings from sawn
stock, and thin plywood can make very good stapling
strips. These pieces are heavier than plastic and they
distribute pressure over greater area, so fewer staples
may be needed. The biggest problem with using them
is that they tend to bond to the veneer when epoxy
squeezes out through openings or cracks. When this
happens, use an offset paring chisel to carefully peel off
the strip. Prevent wood strips from sticking by laying
down 6 mil plastic strips prior to stapling.
Wood stapling strips are also useful for preventing
damage to veneer. When you use plastic banding, each
staple is likely to leave a small, hard-to-sand indenta-
tion, which may discolor slightly after coating. The
process of removing staples can also mar the surface 
of veneer, and wood stapling strips provide some
protection against this.
The special care required for removing staples from the
first and last layers of veneer is described in other parts
of this chapter. All staples in all layers, from the second
layer on, may be removed within hours after they are
applied. In fact, it’s much easier to pull them out when
epoxy is partially cured but strong enough to hold
veneers by itself, so we recommend that you attempt
this at the earliest possible moment. When your epoxy
is fully cured, staples are much tougher to remove and
you will spend a lot more time on the job.
Depending on which hardener you use and the temper-
atures at which you are working, start removing staples
4 to 7 hours after applying a layer of veneer. It’s easy to
determine the partial cure stage. Check epoxy that has
squeezed up between veneers. If it is generally hard to
the touch but you can dent it with your fingernail, it’s
ready. If you have used banding tape, pull its end
directly up and away from the hull. Many of your
staples will remain embedded in the tape.
Staples remaining in the hull often dangle by one leg.
Pull these out with a pair of pliers. Some, especially
those that are at a bad angle, may tear through the
stapling strip and remain in the lamination. These will
have to be removed by hand, but since tugging on the
strip usually lifts them a little, there probably will be
gaps between the hull and their crowns into which you
can insert a staple-pulling tool.
Where no gap exists, staple removal is a little more
difficult, and a well-designed staple remover comes in
handy. Although the principles are simple and variations
234
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 21-8  Various staple removers.
Bauman’s artfully
reworked bearing
scraper
Store-bought tack
puller – nice but
needs customizing
Rather tedious store-bought
stamped-out model
Jaws must be re-ground
Much revered parrot’s-beak pliers
Compression
spring to make
things more
enjoyable
Taped handles
Awl- short and bent
Rebuilt 1⁄4" wood chisel – rounded and
smoothed, this one is easy to sharpen

--- PAGE 249 ---
on them are potentially endless, we have been able to
find only one effective staple removing tool, a model
designed for upholsterers manufactured by the Stanley
Tool Company. A good tool should have a very sharp,
hardened steel point which inserts easily under the
crown of a staple, and it should have a fulcrum
immediately aft of this point which is wide enough 
to prevent damage to the wood. You should be able 
to rock the handle to extract the staple with minimal
effort. Figure 21-8 shows some of the tools we have
built in the shop with these design criteria in mind.
You can modify a large screwdriver by grinding its end
to a sharp wide edge and by grinding a curve on one
side so that there is some rocker on the side opposite
the edge. If, after grinding, you find that your fulcrum
is too small, try bending the screwdriver slightly. A
well-hardened screwdriver may not permit this, in
which case you can bond a piece of wood or add 
thickened epoxy to build up the fulcrum. Your staple
remover will receive a lot of use, so it’s worth the time 
it takes to make a good tool that works easily and well.
Applying the First Layer of Veneer
The first layer will become the interior of your boat, so
select its veneers with great care and present the finest
grain and color you have. We almost always naturally
finish interiors because they are beautiful and practical
when done this way.
Begin by placing a master veneer in the middle of the
mold. If you start here, you can plank toward the stem
and toward the transom simultaneously. If two people
or teams are available, they can work in opposite direc-
tions. Because your angle is in the middle of the hull,
it’s easier to maintain as you apply veneers. There is no
set rule for the angle of the first layer, but 45° is good
for starters.
Mark the angle of the first veneer on the polyethylene
mold cover. Set your sliding bevel at the desired angle,
place it on top of a level, and position both tools next
to the hull. Move the level until its bubble is centered 
in its markings and transfer the angle from the bevel
square to the mold. Make a mark just long enough to
indicate the placement of the first veneer. Then hold 
the veneer on the mold and draw a line all the way
across the mold surface to show its exact position.
If you are installing the master veneer on a mold which
has an inset permanent keel, apply an epoxy mixture
thickened with 404 High-Density Filler to both the keel 
and veneer surfaces to bond it in place. Clamp well
with staples. Hold the veneer in position on the rest 
of the mold with as few staples as necessary. To fasten
Chapter 21 – Laminating Veneer Over a Mold or Plug
235
Figure 21-9  Fitting the first layer of cedar veneer for a
laminated hull. The plank is secured in the middle, then the
ends are adjusted and fitted to an adjoining plank.
Figure 21-10 Applying epoxy to the edge of a previously
fastened plank.

--- PAGE 250 ---
1⁄8" (3mm) veneers, we usually use 3⁄8" (9mm) long wide
crown staples and an air-powered, electric-powered, or
hand-powered staple gun. If these staples won’t hold
the veneer, try 1⁄2" (12mm) long staples.
When the master veneer is in position, fit the veneers
on either side of it. Because of the hull’s compound
curvature, these will not butt perfectly. Your next step
will be to trim or spile the planks so that they fit well
and lie flat without distorting.
Spiling
The goal of spiling is to taper the ends of a piece of
veneer. The amount of spiling necessary for any hull 
is in direct proportion to the extent of its compound
curvature. Trim and fit your first layer by hand, and
remember that your craftsmanship will be on display
whenever anyone looks at the interior of the hull.
A typical veneer will taper more at its top and bottom
and less towards its middle. A scant 1⁄8" (3mm) of wood
may have to be trimmed from the ends of veneers for a
long, thin hull, since its planking will taper gradually in
a slight curve toward the middle. A full rounded hull,
on the other hand, may require planking that tapers
strongly, so you may have to cut an inch or more off the
ends of veneers for this type of design.
To begin spiling, use a staple gun to lightly tack a new
veneer as close as possible to the master veneer. The
two pieces will usually almost fit at their ends, but
there will be conspicuous gap in the middle. The
reason for fitting the veneer at this point is to mark it
and to make sure that it has a proper lay. Figures 21-11
and 21-12 suggest guidelines for evaluating this.
Proper lay is especially important when you spile longer
veneers. As they get longer, it becomes easier to position
them so that one end is tighter to the mold than the
other. If you mark a plank with an improper lay, the
error will show up when you permanently install it. It
takes a bit of experience to get the feel of what will and
will not work.
If one edge of the middle of the veneer is tighter to the
mold than the other, correct the problem by moving
the ends until both edges are an equal distance from it.
To further check the lay, clamp the middle section of
the veneer to the mold with several staples and move
the free ends slightly back and forth until you find the
natural, neutral position that each will take. Temporarily
position the ends with a couple of staples and mark the
piece for trimming.
Use a scribe or a compass, as shown in Figure 21-14, 
to mark the veneer. For greater accuracy, especially on
heavily compounded hulls, you can make a special
spiling marker. Whichever tool you use, set it to the
maximum distance between the two veneers, using the
edge of the master veneer as a guide. Draw a line of this
236
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 21-11  Guidelines for evaluating the proper lay of planking. (1) Planking laid too close to plumb will not show
compounding, but may break when bent around the bilge. (2) Planking laid at too low an angle will bend easily around the bilge,
but may develop more severe compounding, resulting in lumps between the staple lines along the stringers. This compounding
depends on the relationship between the bend around the curve of the bilge and the bend required along the fore and aft axis,
“X”. (3) By experimenting with the curvature at different angles, one can arrive at an angle that will bend easily around the bilge
without excessive compounding.

--- PAGE 251 ---
distance on the temporarily fastened veneer all the way
from keel to sheer. Remove the marked veneer and trim
it to the line with a saw and plane.
Finally, trim veneers with a hand-held block plane. In
instances where you don’t have to remove much stock,
this may be the only tool you need. If you set the plane
blade a little deeper than you would normally, you can
remove material very rapidly.
When it is trimmed, position the newly spiled veneer
next to the master veneer on the mold for a final check.
You can usually hold it in place with your hands and
knee. If you marked and cut accurately, the veneer
should fit. Mark any humps or gaps on the edge with a
pencil, remove the piece, and lightly touch it up with
the plane. The first and last layers of veneer will be
visible and should fit well everywhere, but you can
leave 1⁄16" to 1⁄8" (1mm to 3mm) gaps between interior
veneers.
After you have fit the first plank, you will find that spiling
the next series of veneers is very similar: about the same
amount of wood will have to be removed from the same
areas for a good fit. As you become more experienced,
you will be able to anticipate the amount of material to
be removed. The job will progress much faster as it
becomes more repetitive, and you will soon see that you
can position a piece for marking in a short time. A
straight, true edge on the veneer is important because 
a crooked edge will mislead you and slow progress.
As you fit veneers for the first layer, staple them to the
mold and bond them to any permanent members just
as you did with the master veneer. Be careful not to lose
your veneer angle. If you spile too much off the top or
bottom of a series of veneers, the angle will change in
that direction. Although a few degrees is not worth
worrying about, correct any substantial deviation by
installing a tapered veneer to restore your original angle.
Although it takes a little extra time, there are good
reasons to edge glue first layer veneers. Edge gluing
Chapter 21 – Laminating Veneer Over a Mold or Plug
237
Figure 21-12 Guidelines for edge setting. In some cases during fastening, a person may try to force or edge set poorly spiled
and fitted planks as in (1). This edge setting subjects the plywood to stresses in such a way as to distort it along the plank’s
edge, lifting it off the stringer, mold or previous layers of veneer, as in (2) where lumps are formed as the planking is stapled to
the stingers. Minor lumps can be stapled flat, but severe ones will not go away. Proper initial fitting is the best solution, as no
edge setting is needed. However, if a poor fit finds its way into the planking job, the solution is to fasten the plank flat, ignoring
the edge fit and relying on the gap-filling qualities of the epoxy mixture to fill the void.
Figure 21-13 Fitting a veneer against a previously bonded
plank.

--- PAGE 252 ---
prevents epoxy from running out between the edges of
the first layer as the second layer is applied and in this
way contributes to the quality of an interior surface. 
If the epoxy hardens, it will be more difficult to sand
than uncoated wood, and bumpy surfaces may result.
Precoating the veneers to avoid unevenness is imprac-
tical since many staple holes will have to be coated and
filled anyway. A second advantage of edge gluing is that
it makes the first layer more rigid, so fewer staples are
required to hold the veneers in position.
To edge glue the first layer of veneer, add 407 Low-
Density Filler to epoxy for a mixture with gap-filling
consistency. Apply the minimum amount of adhesive
necessary to the edges of the veneers. Clamp with
staples, using a thin wooden batten or pieces of scrap
veneer to distribute pressure over the entire length of
the joint. Be sure to cover the stapling sticks with
plastic so they won’t stick to the veneers.
Applying WEST SYSTEM Epoxy
Structural, gap-filling adhesives make it possible to
laminate hulls with little clamping pressure. Low-
pressure laminating procedures do have a few predictable
trouble spots, but you can avoid these by properly
applying WEST SYSTEM epoxy and filler mixtures between
layers of veneer. If you have not yet done so, read over
the laminating section of Chapter 11 to be certain that
you understand the procedures outlined there.
No matter how well you staple the wood, you may end
up with less-than-contact pressure in some areas.
Voids—air pockets between layers of veneer—are there-
fore an ever-present problem. The key to eliminating
them is to use a high-viscosity epoxy mixture and to
apply slightly more of it than you really need. If you do
this, voids will usually be filled solidly with epoxy. WEST
SYSTEM epoxy can safely span reasonably large areas and
make them as strong as any other part of the laminate.
Without fillers, epoxy is too thin and runny to be used
in laminating. Increase its viscosity and reduce its
density by adding WEST SYSTEM 407 Low-Density Filler.
This mixture is ideal for use between layers of veneer
and also somewhat cheaper by volume than epoxy
alone. Filler slightly retards epoxy penetration and
reduces the possibility of an epoxy-starved joint. A side
benefit of this mixture is that it is easier to sand than
regular epoxy and so saves time when you clean and
fair between laminations.
Mixtures of WEST SYSTEM epoxy and low-density filler
are almost always well above grain strength, but if you
are using veneers from high-density woods, you may
want to use a high-density filler. 407 Low-Density Filler
may be inadequate for wood with high grain strength.
Stir either filler into the epoxy to the consistency of
heavy syrup. The mixture should be thin enough to
apply with a foam roller or a notched squeegee. It 
must be able to spread easily within the laminate as 
you apply pressure and flow to areas where it is most
needed to fill gaps. You also want excess adhesive to
work its way to the edges of the veneer, where it can
escape to the surface.
238
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 21-14 Scribing with a compass.
Figure 21-15 Applying an adhesive epoxy mixture to the
edge of a cedar plank.
Compass or scriber
should be kept level
or parallel with some
reference line
It should not pivot 
along the edge being
scribed

--- PAGE 253 ---
There is an optimum quantity of adhesive for most
laminating situations. If you use too little, there may not
be enough epoxy between the veneers to fill voids and
gaps. Too much mixture, especially if it is too thick,
may form puddles. When these develop, the veneer
may bulge and you may have a bump in the hull,
which you’ll have to fair smooth. Using too much
epoxy is expensive and messy.
Two factors determine the quantity of epoxy to apply.
The first is the quality of the laminating surfaces. If the
veneers are rough and the surface not particularly fair,
you will have more voids and more need of a gap-filling
adhesive. The amount of pressure and the type of
curves in the hull also affect application rates.
Usually, a spread rate of about 20 square feet per pound
(4m2/kg) of epoxy, before adding fillers, is adequate for
rough surfaces. A rate of 30 square feet per pound
(6m2/kg) is possible with better surfaces and adequate
pressure. If in doubt, start out using a little bit too
much adhesive and then adjust downward, using a little
less with each veneer until you reach a good rate.
It is essential to apply enough epoxy mixture to the
veneer, but it is just as important that this be spread
evenly over the entire surface area. Even distribution
helps to prevent dry spots. We use both foam rollers
and notched plastic spreaders to ensure even distribu-
tion. Techniques for using these simple tools are
described in detail in earlier chapters. Although the
squeegee is a little harder to get used to and can be
messy if you’re not careful, it is better at spreading a
predictable amount of adhesive on a surface. It is also
superior if the adhesive mixture is so thick that it is
difficult to apply with normal rolling methods.
Pour adhesive directly from its mixing pot as evenly as
possible along the surface to be coated, and move it
around with an 809 Notched Spreader until the entire
area is evenly covered. Remove any excess epoxy from
the wood and transfer it to the next veneer.
If you are using an 800 Roller Cover, you can either
pour the epoxy directly from the pot onto the veneer or
put it in a pan first and then pick it up with the roller
to apply it. Maintain a relatively even coating thi