nded most of the parts before installing
them in your hull. It is usually most efficient to sand
exterior surfaces on the completed hull after all coatings
have been applied.
General sanding of a cured epoxy surface can be a lot
of hard work, especially if you are working towards a
high-gloss final finish. There are, fortunately, some
laborsaving shortcuts. We use a foam disc grinding pad
on a light-duty power circular polisher to rough and
smooth-sand 90% of the hull’s exterior surface areas.
Usually, we use 80 to 100-grit sandpaper with the
sanding pad to first rough sand coated surfaces, and
then use 120 to 180-grit for power finish sanding.
Many boatbuilders find this surface adequate. A further
wet sanding by hand with 220 to 320-grit paper will
produce an extremely smooth surface for a high-gloss
finish for either varnish or paint.
A good way to verify that the surface is contaminant
free before painting or varnishing is to wet it down with
clean water (no soap). If it is contaminant free, the water
will sheet off and be perfectly smooth. If it is contami-
nated, fisheyes will appear or areas will bead up rather
than laying out in a smooth sheen. If contamination is
present, wet sand or scrub the area with an abrasive
pad and water until the surface is contaminant free.
Primers
We find that we rarely need primer paints when we
coat hulls with WEST SYSTEM epoxy. Primers can’t, of
course, be used on naturally finished hulls, but even on
painted surfaces, they don’t seem to result in any partic-
ular saving in finishing time.
Primers are not usually needed to help bond a paint
film to cured WEST SYSTEM epoxy. Most finish coatings
readily adhere to a clean and well-sanded epoxy-coated
surface, although interfacing primers are required with
some specialized bottom paints. If the instructions on
your paint or varnish recommend a specially primed
surface, sand your epoxy coating until it is no longer
Chapter 15 – Coating and Finishing
157
Figure 15-5  Finish sanding gray pigmented epoxy on the
deck of Slingshot. Orbital finish sanders are very effective for
such finish sanding.

--- PAGE 172 ---
glossy or shiny and follow the directions given for fiber-
glass preparation. Test the product in an inconspicuous
area to be sure that it will bond to epoxy. If any product
fails to dry within the period specified on its packaging,
try a different brand or use a primer.
Primers are sometimes used to make sanding quicker.
The theory is that they are easier to sand than epoxy;
while this may be true in some situations, you must
weigh the benefit against the time needed to apply the
paint and to achieve an even surface. Since primers are
difficult to apply evenly with a roller or brush—because
of the safety issues involved, we can automatically rule
out spraying primer paints—application time may well
exceed any extra epoxy sanding time. Primers definitely
do not flow as well as WEST SYSTEM epoxy, so you need
a good deal of sanding just to get the primer as smooth
as the original rough-sanded epoxy surface.
A colored base coat will facilitate final fairing by serving
as a guide to prevent oversanding and will also, to some
extent, reduce the number of coats of paint needed to
cover an unpainted surface. When we plan to paint a
hull, we therefore often add WEST SYSTEM pigment to
our final coat of epoxy and use this instead of primer
as a tracer coat.
Surface Glazing
While primers don’t significantly reduce finishing time,
glazing or surface compounds often do. These commer-
cially available products are much thinner than standard
puttying fillers, so you can apply them quickly in a thin
film over large areas. We recommend using a wide
putty knife or squeegee to apply surfacer. This technique
results in a relatively smooth surface which is not diffi-
cult to sand to a fine finish. Since small particles of dirt
can interfere with your finish, be sure your surface is
clean before applying these products.
Surfacing compounds have an advantage over primer
paints in that they are high solids materials and can be
used to mechanically force-fill small voids and depres-
sions. Imperfections in an overall cured epoxy surface
can be filled quickly and efficiently, assuming that they
are reasonably small or shallow. Often, the choice is
between sanding away small air holes and valleys or
filling them. The extra sanding takes time and may
involve the removal of more protective epoxy coating
than desirable, so surfacing compounds present an
attractive alternative.
All major paint companies market these compounds
with instructions for their use. Be sure to select compat-
ible surfacer and finishing systems since some finishes
use very active solvents which can lift surfacing materials.
Also check your instructions to be sure that you use
the recommended thinner when your compound is too
thick to apply in a controlled thin film.
Be particularly aware of the consistency of your glazing
compound as you apply it. If it is too thick, it will be
difficult to apply in a controlled film, and if it is too
thin, you will lose filling power. It’s better to err on the
thin side because you can always apply a second coat,
and this is much quicker than sanding away excess.
You may have to add thinner at regular intervals to
make up for its continual evaporation as you work.
Paints
Over the years, we have tried many different paints
manufactured by many different suppliers, but we
haven’t tried them all. Historically, some paints and
varnishes have not cured well over WEST SYSTEM epoxy.
207 Special Coating Hardener is an exception in that
158
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 15-6 Rolling on two-part linear polyurethane paint.

--- PAGE 173 ---
most paints and varnishes cure without a problem.
When using the other hardeners, paint behavior can be
unpredictable. We can’t test all of the many brands on
the market, so we urge you to experiment with your
planned finishing system before you make a major
investment in it.
Linear polyurethane (LP) paints are without question
vastly superior to any others we have used. We recom-
mend LP systems highly. They have excellent resistance
to sunlight, salt spray, and other weathering agents.
Because they are as hard and resistant to abrasion as
polyester gelcoat, they are used almost exclusively for
recoating fiberglass hulls. Linear polyurethanes bond
extremely well to properly prepared WEST SYSTEM epoxy-
coated surfaces and typically cure without a problem. 
LP paints may be sprayed, rolled, and brushed. Hand
application is slower than spray painting, but requires
less preparation, so there is not a great time difference
between the two methods. In some situations, brushing
may be quicker. In all cases, it is far safer.
Hazardous solvent fumes escape from any type of paint
as it is applied, and care must be taken to provide
adequate ventilation during painting operations. Linear
polyurethanes present additional health hazards because
they contain 1% to 2% isocyanate, a highly toxic
material. When LP paints are sprayed, isocyanate is
atomized and may be inhaled. Most LP manufacturers
recommend that spray painters wear forced air respira-
tors while working, but we recommend that you simply
do not spray LP paints; roller and brush application of
linear polyurethanes substantially reduces the problem.
Clear Coatings and Natural Finishes
Clear coatings, including varnishes, are attractive,
durable, and fairly easy to apply. Their major drawback
is that they break down under exposure to sunlight and
therefore require more maintenance than pigmented
coatings. We share the desire of wooden boatbuilders to
show off the beauty of the material, but because a major
goal of our philosophy is to keep things practical, we
prefer to use clear coatings in interior and other areas
where the effects of ultraviolet rays are minimal. See
Chapter 26 for a discussion of varnishing interiors.
Two things happen when a clear-coated surface is
subjected to too much sunlight. The first and most
obvious is that the varnish itself gradually degrades. At
the same time, in a less well understood process, slight
chemical and physical changes take place in the surface
wood cells through the varnish. These changes may
contribute to coating failure by promoting the physical
separation of an already-weakened coating from the
ultraviolet-altered wood.
With the limitations of present technology, all clear
coatings on wood may be expected to break down in
the presence of sunlight. The time this takes depends
on the formulation of the specific coating, the number
of hours it is exposed to sunlight, the location of the
varnished item on the boat, and the surface under the
clear coating.
Some clear coatings have longer life spans than others.
Those which last the longest contain expensive ultravi-
olet shields. Sold by most marine paint manufacturers,
these are usually called spar varnishes; one of the easiest
ways to recognize them is their high cost. Most spar
varnishes have a phenolic resin base mixed with tung
and linseed oil, a combination which is less hard and
durable than LP paint but which historically has the
best track record among clear coatings for withstanding
sunlight. There are now a number of clear linear
polyurethane paint systems formulated with UV filters,
which provide even better UV resistance when used
over epoxy.
Varnish will last longer on hull topsides than on decks.
Decks receive direct exposure to sunlight, but hull sides
take only glancing blows and are usually partially
shaded. The early morning and late afternoon sun that
shines directly on topsides is not nearly so destructive
as midday light because its rays are well filtered by
atmospheric interference. For these reasons, two coats
of spar varnish over WEST SYSTEM epoxy on a deck
might last only a summer in our Michigan climate but
twice as long on the hull sides.
You can cut down on labor and extend the life of your
varnish considerably by adding a new coat every year.
At the beginning of every season, lightly sand your
clear-coated areas and apply a single coat of varnish.
Using WEST SYSTEM epoxy as a base for varnish appears
to lengthen the life of a clear coating. We feel that the
reason for this is the very tenacious bond that is made
between the epoxy and the wood fiber. It seems to be
Chapter 15 – Coating and Finishing
159

--- PAGE 174 ---
more difficult for wood to separate from a well-bonded
epoxy coating as it alters under UV rays than from a
standard varnish. 207 Special Coating Hardener has been
developed specifically for this application. It includes UV
filters and works synergistically with the varnish applied
over it to protect the wood/epoxy interface.
Any natural finish which is exposed to sunlight will
require more maintenance than a colored coating. 
All decisions on bright finishing should be made with
full realization that more upkeep will be necessary in
the future. Repair of dings and gouges is much more
difficult on a naturally finished hull and may require
routing out a whole outer layer of veneer. On the other
hand, one advantage of a clear-coated hull is that should
you decide that a natural finish is not practical for your
situation, you can paint it. It’s much more difficult to
change from paint to a clear coating than to change
from clear coating to paint.
There are many excellent clear coatings on the market.
Different brands may react differently to heat, cold, and
humidity, so experience with a given brand is perhaps
the largest single factor in a successful job. Test all
coating materials on a small sample of your surface
before applying them. Buy a small quantity of your
proposed finish, apply it following manufacturer’s
instructions, and if it doesn’t dry within an appropriate
period, try a different brand.
Cost
In general, the costs of paint, varnish, and related
materials are a very small portion of the total cost of
a boat’s paint job. Surface preparation and coating
application require an enormous amount of time, so an
expensive but long-lasting paint is usually a better value
than a short-lived, inexpensive coating. When you
make decisions on paint, consider the quality and
reputation of a product as well as its price. A coating
that costs twice as much and lasts twice as long as its
competitor is probably a better buy because it will save
you considerable labor.
We suggest that you gather all available information
about the paint or varnish you intend to use. Most
manufacturers publish complete technical bulletins on
their specific coatings and coatings systems as well as
application and mixing instructions. Experience with
one brand will help you to predict its behavior in
different situations, but, in all cases, we recommend
testing paints and varnishes before applying them to
large areas.
160
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 15-7 Bright finish on Golden Dazy.
Figure 15-8 Bright finish on IOR 1⁄2-ton yacht Hot Flash.

--- PAGE 175 ---
Applying Paint and Varnish
We are always reluctant to spray paint or varnish
because of the health hazards involved in the applica-
tion method and have usually relied on the roller-brush
method of painting and varnishing. With some experi-
ence and the benefit of a good material, this technique
can rival a quality sprayed finish, but you must develop
your skills. We hope that the following comments will
help. See Chapter 26 for details on applying varnish
and paints to interiors.
Before you begin coating, prepare your final sanded
surface. It must be free of all dust, dirt, sanding residue,
and contaminants. We suggest using a four-step surface
preparation procedure:
1. Wipe down the hull using a large sponge, continu-
ally rinsing it out in a large bucket of water. Try to
keep it as clean as possible as you remove the
majority of the loose material from the hull surface.
2. Wipe the wet hull dry with soft, clean rags or paper
towels.
3. Wipe the hull down again, following the paint
manufacturer’s recommendations for final surface
preparation.
4. If recommended by the paint manufacturer, use a
tack rag to remove any remaining dust or dirt from
the hull surface. (Use a tack rag again just prior to
applying paint to the surface.)
Dust control can sometimes be a difficult problem in a
wooden boatshop. Usually, you should discontinue all
wood sawing or machining operations well in advance
of the actual painting operation. It is a good idea to wet
down the entire boatshop floor with a light spray of
water. This will not only help keep dust down on the
floor, but will also attract dust from the air.
Use the same foam sponge rollers to apply the paint
film that you used to apply WEST SYSTEM epoxy and for
the same reason: control. This type of roller does an
excellent job of applying a controlled film thickness
over a large area in a minimum amount of time.
The primary uses of a brush are to smooth out the
stipple finish which the roller leaves and to paint those
areas that are difficult for the roller to reach. Even appli-
cation of paint to a surface is difficult with a brush
because of the problem of controlling the film thickness.
The painting job is best split up between two people,
and this is without question the fastest method. Arm
one person with a roller and roller pan and the other
with a 3" or 4" (75mm or 100mm) wide brush and a
small container of paint. The “roller” begins application
of the paint, using long, steady strokes to cover a
specific area before the roller is again filled in the paint
tray. It is important to learn early the approximate
surface area you can cover with a roller full of paint as
you apply it to the hull surface. Once you have devel-
oped a feel for “area,” you will be able to plan the
rolling application better. Then you won’t get in trouble
with too much paint collected in a given area and no
place to move it to. A common error is to discover that
you are a little light on paint film in one area, but in
correcting the situation you make it much worse by
applying much more paint than the area can handle
without running. The solution is to learn how to get
just a little paint out of the roller pan with the roller,
just as you might control the amount of paint on a
paint brush by scraping it against the sides of a paint
can. It’s harder to do with the roller, but can be done.
Immediately after the paint is rolled on, the “brush
person” follows with a slightly wet-out brush, stroking
the surface vertically or horizontally with only enough
pressure to smooth the coating. Finer brushes will
produce the smoothest surfaces with the best chance for
flow out, and we suggest that you use only high-quality
brushes. The “brusher” should follow the “roller” as
closely as possible without getting in his way, so that
the time span from initial roller application to final
brushing is as short as possible. This gives the paint
film the best chance to flow out before the solvent
content of the paint film begins to evaporate. For best
results, always finish your brush stroke in the previously
applied “wet” paint area.
Paints are usually composed of 40% to 60% solvents,
most of which will evaporate before the paint film
cures. These solvents play a key role in the successful
development of the surface finish. Immediately after
you apply paint to a surface, the solvents it contains
will begin to evaporate, and a cure or drying out of the
paint film begins. The rate at which the solvents evapo-
rate is crucial to the roller-brush application process. If
the solvents evaporate too fast, the paint film will not
have a chance to flow out smoothly. Brush or roller
marks will remain visible. If too much solvent is used,
Chapter 15 – Coating and Finishing
161

--- PAGE 176 ---
the paint will have less viscosity, resulting in a thinner
paint film which may not have the coverage or the
desired gloss. The object, of course, is to use just
enough thinner to promote good flowing of the paint
and no more. Hot, dry conditions will require that 
you use more thinner due to faster evaporation.
Manufacturers also offer fast or slow thinners to help
with the evaporation problem.
As the painting progresses, the “brusher” will have the
best feel as to how the paint is working. If it is dragging
under the brush, add more solvent for proper flowing.
Usually, you can add this right into the roller pan and
immediately stir it in with the paint. On hot dry days,
evaporation will cause a rapid loss of solvent out of the
roller pan, causing a paint to become too stiff for proper
flowing. You can solve this problem with small applica-
tions of solvent to the roller pan at frequent intervals to
match the amount of solvent lost by evaporation.
Again, the “brusher” will be the first to feel that the
paint is getting too stiff.
Usually, two coats of paint are required with the roller-
brush method for sufficient color coverage. You can use
the application of the first coat to gain experience in
application methods. If you get some runs, dull spots,
or actual misses, you can correct them before you apply
a second coat. Runs are usually the most difficult
problem, but it is common to sand a little between
coats anyway, so they aren’t regarded as a major disaster
on the first coat. However, with the second coat, you’re
pretty well stuck with them. If you do develop runs on
the second coat, hopefully you will discover them
before the paint film begins to stiffen. The only chance
to deal with a run and make it better is to stroke the
immediate area of the run lightly with a small brush
that is as dry of paint as possible. The object is not to
add any more paint in the area of the run, but, in fact,
to remove some with the brush.
To achieve the optimum final finish, a light sanding
between coats with fine paper is desirable because this
removes any dust or imperfections which might exist in
the first coat surface and provides the best possible
surface for the final coat.
162
Core Boatbuilding Techniques

--- PAGE 177 ---
First Production Steps
Chapter 16
Lofting
Chapter 17
Mold Frames and Permanent Frames
Chapter 18
Setting Up
Chapter 19
Keels, Stems, and Sheer Clamps

--- PAGE 179 ---
Lofting as a discipline has taken a back seat to computer-generated plans and computer-controlled
machined templates and parts. Computers have taken over and are doing the time-consuming work of
describing and reconciling the three dimensional object (the boat) in two dimensions. A number of
computer lofting applications are available, and we can assume that price, accessibility, and features will
continue to improve.
But lofting and the knowledge of how to do it correctly have not diminished as useful skills to learn. The
fundamentals of descriptive geometry have broad-ranging application and infinite utility. If you know how
to loft, the computer cannot lie to you—you will be able to check its work. If you have never lofted, we
continue to urge new builders to loft a small boat (or even a large boat to scale) to understand the princi-
ples and the process. The computer may break down, or the plans or the program may not have all the
detail you want for a specific project. Take the time to learn the skill of lofting, and it will serve you better
than any alternatives. For clarity, we use only English measures in examples of proportion and offsets.
Before you can actually build a boat, you must loft 
its lines to full size. This means taking the small scale
plans of the design and projecting them to actual boat
size. Most boat hulls are complexes of curved surfaces.
Lofting guarantees that these curves flow smoothly into
one another with fair, even lines. Because lofting deter-
mines the exact shape of the mold stations, success in
lofting means that the stringers and planking can be
easily applied to the molds and the resultant hull 
will be fair and look and perform as the designer
envisioned. On the other hand, a poor job of lofting
will result in parts not fitting and a shape that is hard 
to plank. Sometimes, poor lofting can lead to dissatis-
faction and abandonment of the project.
This process of drawing the lines that describe the shape
of the boat full size is necessary to correct the errors that
creep into the small-scale lines drawing that the designer
uses to develop the shape of the hull. For example, if 
a boat were designed using a scale of 1" equals 1 foot,
for a 30' boat you would have a 30" lines drawing. You
would need to expand this 30" drawing 12 times in all
directions, and in doing so, you would also have all the
errors that were drawn into the lines drawing multi-
plied by 12. This would result in inaccuracies that would
detract from the even, smooth curves of the hull.
Properly done, lofting corrects these inaccuracies.
Making the corrections on the lofting floor rather than
after construction has begun saves a great deal of labor
and is necessary to produce a fair hull.
If you have never lofted a boat before, accurate lofting
will be time-consuming. In many ways, it allows you to
mentally build the boat before sawing any timber.
Thought and head scratching expended at this stage
will surely save frustration and errors after the actual
construction has begun.
Lofting is a process that is hard to visualize or under-
stand until you actually do it. To explain it abstractly is
difficult. Furthermore, each loftsman has his own tricks
for making the job easier, quicker, and more accurate.
We recommend that you look over this entire chapter
before you begin. If you are daunted by the idea of
starting out full-size, loft a simple boat on a large piece
of paper. This will help you get a feel for what you’re
doing.
The following is a general discussion of the procedures
involved. More detailed explanations can be found in
Boatbuilding by Howard I. Chapelle, Lofting by Allan
H. Vaitses, and Boatbuilding Manual, 4th Ed. by
Robert M. Steward. If you have access to a computer
and want to use it in the lofting process, consult
Steward’s book.
Lofting
C H A P T E R
16

--- PAGE 180 ---
Hull Lines Drawings
The lines drawings will show three different views of
the boat. Figure 16-2 shows a simple set of lines. The
profile is the shape of the boat from a side view. The
half breadth plan is the top view from the deck. The
body plan is the end view of the boat from either bow
or stern.
Figure 16-1 The lines show three different views of the boat.
The amateur builder will find the building project much easier
if he takes the time to study the plans and attempts to see the
boat in the lines.
There are four types of lines in the drawings: the station
lines, buttock lines, waterlines, and diagonal lines.
Together they form a three-dimensional grid. Each line
represents an imaginary plane passing through the hull. 
Station lines: The imaginary planes of the station lines
run vertically and athwartship. The shapes of the
stations are shown stacked atop each other in the body
plan view, half on one side of the centerline, half on the
other. Station lines are almost always numbered.
Buttock lines: The imaginary planes of the buttocks
pass through the boat vertically, fore and aft. The planes
are spaced, generally at regular distances, off the center-
plane that divides the hull in half. The centerplane is
seen as the profile.
Waterlines: For these lines, the planes pass through
the hull horizontally, at certain distances from the
baseline.
Diagonal lines: The imaginary planes of the diagonals
always run fore and aft, but are neither vertical nor
horizontal. The intersection of a diagonal with the
profile plane forms a line that is parallel to and some
specified distance above the baseline. The height and
the angle are chosen by the designer to facilitate fairing
of the hull and usually intersect the body plan station
lines at angles as close to 90° as possible.
For any set of lines, in at least two views, the station
lines, buttocks, waterlines, and diagonals are repre-
sented as straight lines, and this forms the grid. On the
third view, these lines are shown as curved or sectional
views which represent the intersection of the plane with
the surface of the hull.
The profile view will include the sheer line, keel, and
stem. The buttocks appear on the profile view as
section views of the boat in the same plane at specific
distances away from the centerline. In the half breadth
plan appear the deck line and all the waterline sections.
The diagonal sections also appear on this view. The
body plan is made up of section views of the areas of
the hull that the station lines intersect. The section from
the bow to the widest point amidships will show up on
one side of the centerline, and from the stern to the
widest point amidships will be the other side.
Because most boat hulls are symmetrical, you only need
to loft one half of the boat. However, some multihull
designs have asymmetrical hulls, and, in these cases,
obviously, you would have to lay out both sides of the
hull.
The Table of Offsets
The table of offsets provides the dimensions needed to
loft the hull lines. It is arrived at by the designer by
measuring the hull lines drawings with a scale rule.
Above the table of offsets will be noted the units of
measurement employed, for example, “offsets in feet,
inches and eighths.” A plus or minus will indicate a
measurement slightly over or under that indicated, for
instance, 1⁄16". Thus, 1-8-5 in the table in Figure 16-3
would be 1' 8 5⁄8". The offsets for the profile view will be
shown in heights above baseline or, in some cases,
below baseline. Included in these offsets will be the
profile view of the boat, which would be the keel, 
stem, and sheer line, and the profile view of the 
166
First Production Steps
Both the designer’s hull
lines plan and the builder’s
lofting are orthographic
projections of the boat
hull.

--- PAGE 181 ---
Chapter 16 – Lofting
167
Figure 16-2 A simple set of lines showing the three views: profile, body plan and half breadth. The diagonals are drawn in at the bottom using the half breadth centerline.
Isometric drawings around the edge show hull lines as they intersect a regular prism. (These drawings are for illustration only.)
Water line
Diagonal
Buttock line
Station line

--- PAGE 182 ---
168
First Production Steps
buttocks sections. A second set of offsets will be the half
breadth view measured from centerline, which will give
you the deck line and half breadth section views of the
waterlines. Another set of offsets will give you the
diagonal sections from the centerline. The diagonal
sections are viewed at right angles to the diagonal lines
on the body plan.
Materials for Lofting
The lofting floor: The first thing needed is a place to
loft the boat. Ideally, this space should be about 6' (2m)
longer than the overall length of the boat, and about 4'
or 5' (1.5m) wider than the widest or tallest point of the
boat, whichever is greater. For a multihull, these dimen-
sions usually apply to the biggest hull. Some multihulls,
however, have cabins and wing structures that must be
lofted, and these need half of the total beam plus some
working clearance. With the multihulls we have built
here, we have been able to loft the hulls separately and
then fade in the connecting structures where convenient
on the lofting board. This enabled us to use a much
smaller lofting board, which could be narrower than
half of the true overall beam of the craft.
For us, it has been easiest to loft on a wood floor. If you
have a plywood floor in good condition, you can loft
directly on it. If you want to save the lofting, or if the
floor is in slightly rough condition, lay down a cheap
grade of plywood of sufficient size to do the entire
lofting. Coat this plywood with two coats of white
semi-gloss paint and lightly sand it with 120-grit
sandpaper. You can draw on the surface with lead
pencils as well as ballpoint pens, and the white color
makes everything easy to see.
Steel tapes: It is ideal to have a steel tape which will
measure the full length of the boat and a shorter steel
tape, say 12' (2m) long, that can lock in position. The
shorter tape is handier for doing smaller layout projects.
Straightedge: You can purchase one or make it
yourself. It should be at least a few inches longer than
the distance from the baseline to the uppermost part of
the boat to be lofted. If you are constructing a straight-
edge, clear pine is a good material. To check the
straightedge for accuracy, joint one edge straight and
check it by placing it down on the floor and drawing a
line along the straightedge. Then turn the straightedge
over and slide it up to the line. If there is no error, the
straightedge will just touch the line in both positions. 
It is very important that this tool be as accurate as
possible.
Square: For a smaller boat, you can use a steel
carpenter’s or framing square. On larger projects, you
will have to construct a square to fit the job. Clear pine
works well. We usually make the square out of 1"  4"
(19mm  89mm) wood, with the longer arm the same
length as the straightedge and the shorter arm about
half that length. Check the two usable edges of the
square in the same way you did the straightedge to
make sure that they are perfectly straight. Put in a
diagonal brace to maintain a perfect 90° angle. It is a
good idea to glue the square together, making sure that
any gussets or fasteners used will allow you to lay the
square flat on the lofting board on either of its sides.
This will make the square more versatile.
Figure 16-3 Applying offset dimensions.

--- PAGE 183 ---
Chapter 16 – Lofting
169
Although your square should be perfect, don’t count 
on it for precise 90° angles in lofting. Wherever a true
perpendicular is required, take the time to construct it
using a bar compass.
Bar compass: You can make one yourself with slotted
pieces of wood, bolts, washers, and wing nuts, or you
can buy one at a drafting supply house. It is used to
construct perpendicular lines.
Bevel square or adjustable sliding T-bevel: This is
used to transfer angles from the lofting board to various
parts of the boat.
Weights, or hammer and nails: These hold the
battens in position as they are used to fair the curves of
the boat. Drafting weights are available at some drafting
supply stores and are, of course, the handiest to use;
however, a few dozen flatirons or padded bricks will
do, or you can use a hammer and a pound or two of
No. 6 nails.
Battens: These are thin pieces of wood or plastic which
are bent around nails or weights so that you can draw
curves. They are among the more important lofting
tools. You can purchase sets of plastic battens of
varying flexibility from drafting supply houses, or you
can manufacture wooden battens yourself. The plastic
battens are usually used to lay down the body plan
where the curves are tighter, whereas wooden battens
are usually used to fair waterlines, diagonals, buttocks,
and profile lines.
Spruce or clear white pine of the straightest grain you
can find seem to be the best materials out of which to
make battens. Most hardwoods are not too satisfactory
because they tend to take and hold shape when left
curved. An exception to this is that you can use a thin
ash batten to lay out the station sections of the body
plan or sharp curves in the stem and buttocks.
We usually lay in several 1"  4" (19mm  89mm)
boards of clear pine for battens and rip them up to
varying sizes depending on what we need. As the
lofting progresses, different batten sizes may be desired,
so a little extra material to make specialized battens
comes in handy. Make one main batten that is 5' or 6'
(2m) longer than the length of the boat. It should be
about 3⁄4" (18mm) square for a small boat, and about 1"
(25mm) square for a larger boat. We use a 20-to-1 scarf
in making up battens because the longer the scarf, the
less likely it is that the scarf will cause a hard spot or
kink in the batten. The main job of the batten is to
allow you to sight the expanded lines of the boat and
find areas of error. A crooked or kinky batten will make
this job difficult.
The process of fairing will be much easier if you paint
your battens flat black. The black is in sharp contrast 
to the white lofting floor and eliminates color variations
in the grain of the wood. Using non-glossy paint will
minimize harsh glare spots, as will the use of indirect
lighting over the lofting floor.
Pens and pencils: You will need several ballpoint pens
with different ink colors, several hard lead pencils, a
pencil sharpener, and a felt tip pen. Be sure to use
waterproof pens and markers; there are few things
more irritating than finding that your wet feet have
blurred your carefully drawn lines.
Kneepads or a movable foam cushion: The lofting
process will be far more comfortable if you have
something to kneel on.
Stock for measuring sticks and pick-up sticks: Have
on hand some scrap lumber or a few pieces of 1"  4"
stock which can be ripped into strips. You will need to
make up approximately 15 sticks, half of them as long
as your boat is high from the baseline and half of them
about as wide as its biggest half breadth dimension.
Ideally, the sticks should be slightly wedge-shaped in
section so that one edge makes a point.
Stock for blocks: Have enough 1"  2" (19mm 
38mm) material on hand to make 6" (150mm) long
blocks. You will need one block for each station line 
in your lofting.
Cable and string: Lengths of cable and string will be
used to lay out your lofting grid and must be at least as
long as your lofting floor. The cable will have to stand
up to about 500 pounds of tension and should be
about 1⁄16" (2mm) in diameter.
Laying Out the Grid
The first step in lofting is to lay out the grid for the
three views. The grid is the general name denoting all
of the straight lines that represent the locations of the 

--- PAGE 184 ---
170
First Production Steps
buttocks, waterlines, diagonals, centerlines, and station
lines. You can easily recognize the grid from the lines
drawing by the fact that all the grid lines are straight,
running either parallel with or at right angles to the
baseline. The only exceptions are the diagonals which,
in the body plan, are lines coming off from the center-
line at various angles. In small-scale drawings, most
designers draw separate grids for the profile, half
breadth and body plans to help eliminate confusion.
When the boat is lofted to full size, all these views are
generally superimposed to save space, as in Figure 16-4.
A common line then serves as the baseline of the profile
view and the centerline for the half breadth and diagonal
views. Sometimes a separate grid is laid down on a
portable board for the body plan so that it can be
moved to different areas of the shop in order to build
molds from it. Usually, however, the body plan is super-
imposed on the other views, and the mid-station line of
the profile view serves as the body plan centerline.
The grid is not difficult to lay out, but it is important
that you do it with precision. If an error goes undetected,
it may not show up until many hours later, at which
time there will be little to do but get out the semi-gloss
paint and start over. The grid lines will be permanent,
and, after careful checking, they are drawn in ink.
The baseline: Because you use the baseline to lay out
all the dimensions for the grid, you must lay out this
key line very accurately. Our method is first to stretch a
locating cable alongside where we want the baseline.
We locate the baseline close to one edge of the lofting
board, being sure that there is enough room to loft the
boat above it.
Figure 16-4 A lofting grid laid out for superimposed hull lines. Also pictured, various tools for lofting.
1" X 4" with
plywood
gussets
Lofting weights or ducks–3 to 5 lb
Large Squares
Use different colored pens for each set of
lines to reduce confusion.
Use trammels or bar
compass to lay out
perpendiculars for
station lines.
Bolts with wingnuts
Pin or nail
Pencil
Adjustable bar compass
Pick up sticks
Flat    or    Triangular
Awl
Solid
Plywood

--- PAGE 185 ---
Chapter 16 – Lofting
171
To place the locating cable, we anchor it flush to the
floor at one end with a heavy nail or screw and run it
over cleats to a lever at the other end of the floor. This
lever—a flat board—pivots horizontally on a screw that
passes through it and into the floor, and we anchor the
cable on the underside of the lever between the pivot
and free end. Using the free end as a handle, we then
pull the lever until the cable is in about 500 pounds
tension and nail the free end securely to the floor to
maintain tension. (See Figure 16-5.)
We transfer the location of the cable to the lofting 
floor using the small tool in Figure 16-6. This tool is
designed so that the thin (1⁄32") tongue slips under the
wire without disturbing it and the raised portion butts
into the wire. We put a pencil tick at the end of the
tongue on the lofting, repeating this every few feet.
Station lines: The next step is to draw in the station
lines. In laying these out, you will want the first and
last stations about equal distance from the ends of the
lofting floor so that you have some working room at
each end of your lofting. Using a full length steel tape,
mark and label in light pencil all the station points on
the baseline.
We distrust the first inch of a steel tape. To be sure of
accurate measurements, we slide the tape to its 1" mark
and tick the surface at the 5" mark. Retract the tape so
that its 4" mark lines up with the tick on the board.
Everything is again at zero. Some people slide the tape
to the 1" mark and add the inch to all dimensions, but
we have managed to saw things an inch too short too
many times using this system.
Because an accurate lofting depends on the accuracy
with which you lay out the foundation or grid, always
double check grid dimensions before going on to the
next step. It is important to note at this time that you
must lay down all of the grid dimensions, i.e., station
spacing, waterline spacing, buttock spacing, etc.,
exactly as the designer specifies. They might be hard 
to scale from the lines drawing, but the designer gener-
ally specifies the distances between all of these lines
somewhere on the plans.
Next, erect the station lines perpendicular to the points
you have marked on the baseline. We use the following
procedure. Construct a perpendicular line at the forward
station, using a bar compass. Work to as high a degree
of accuracy as possible. (See Figure 16-4.) Using the
straightedge, draw the line in ink and extend it a few
inches above the highest point of the boat to be lofted.
Using the square and a pencil, lightly draw the station
line at the opposite end of the lofting. Extend it a few
inches above the boat’s highest point. Measure from the
baseline up these two station lines to the height of the
boat plus a few inches so that you have a point of equal
distance from the baseline on each station line, now, of
course, parallel to the baseline. Starting at the station
line which was geometrically constructed and drawn in
ink, run a steel tape parallel to the string and mark the
locations of the upper points of the station lines.
Figure 16-5 An arrangement for tightening the baseline
cable.
Figure 16-6 A jig or gauge for transferring the baseline to
the lofting board.
Cleats nailed to the floor
trued and leveled with
transit if possible.
Secure pivot point
Pivot this arm
to tension cable
Jig for marking baseline
off the cable
Do not slide the jig along
the wire – just set it lightly
against the wire every foot
or so.
Jig

--- PAGE 186 ---
172
First Production Steps
After checking the station line dimensions, use your
straightedge and draw in all the station lines in ink. Be
sure to check the station line that you drew in with the
square using light pencil, as the square might be slightly
inaccurate. Using the felt tip pen to make a fat, easy-to-
see line, label the tops and bottoms of the station lines
with the station number. It is good to keep this labeling
below the baseline and above where the lines of the
boat will intersect the station lines.
To make it easier to lay out the rest of the grid, nail
a l"  2" block about 6" long (19mm  38mm 
150mm) at each station line. Position the blocks on the
lofting floor so that they are below and just touching
the baseline and are approximately centered on each
station line. Don’t nail the blocks down too firmly;
several may have to be temporarily removed when you
fair your battens. You will now be able to use
measuring sticks that will follow the station lines and
firmly butt against the blocks, saving you from having
to crawl down to the end of the station line each time
to make sure that the measuring stick is exactly on the
baseline.
Waterlines: The next job is to lay out all of the water-
lines in the profile view. These will run parallel to the
baseline, and the distance between them will have been
specified by the designer. In order to save time and
eliminate potential errors, we use a measuring stick to
mark the locations of the waterlines, rather than relying
on a steel measuring tape at each station. Marking a
measurement of, for example, waterline 2 at 3'-43⁄16"
once on a measuring stick is much less trouble than
having to look this measurement up on the plans and
lay it out each time with a steel tape. The measuring
stick is nothing more than a stick that has the locations
of all the waterlines from the baseline up. Lay the steel
tape along the measuring stick and accurately mark and
label the heights of all the waterlines above the baseline.
Then lay the stick along the station line and butt it
against the block nailed to the baseline. Make a light
pencil mark on the station line at the location of each
waterline. Repeat this procedure at every station line.
Then, using the straightedge, connect all the parallel
dots and draw in all the waterlines using ink. You can
use the same ink color that you are using for the
baseline and the station lines. Label each waterline on
the ends.
Buttock lines: The next job is to lay out the buttocks.
In drawing the buttocks, you will be using the baseline
as a centerline and drawing the buttocks as straight
lines as they are represented in the half breadth view.
Make a measuring stick for locating the buttocks,
following the same procedure that you used to lay
down the waterlines. Use a different ink color in order
to distinguish the buttocks from the waterlines. Label
each buttock. If a buttock and waterline coincide, label
the lines as both.
The body plan: The last job in completing the grid 
is to lay out the grid for the body plan. As mentioned
before, some loftsmen use a separate portable board on
which to draw the body plan, but we draw the body
plan right on the lofting floor, using a station line near
the center of the boat as the centerline of the body plan.
The following directions are for drawing the body plan
on the lofting floor.
Determine which station line you are using for the
centerline of the body plan. On one side of the center-
line, you will be laying out the body plan from the stern
to the widest part of the boat, and, on the other side,
from the bow to the widest point. The waterlines you
have already drawn will be passing through the body
plan at their proper places and will need no further
work. However, you will have to draw in the buttock
lines. Because the body plan represents a view from the
ends of the boat, the buttocks will be vertical lines
parallel to the centerline and at the same distance out
from the centerplane as they have been drawn in the
half breadth plan. Take the buttock measuring stick you
have already made and place it at right angles to the
centerline of the body plan. The upper and lower
waterlines are convenient places to position it for
marking. Draw in the buttocks on both sides of the
centerline and parallel to it. Ink in the buttocks using
the same ink color that you used for the buttocks in the
half breadth plan.
The next job is to lay out the diagonals in the body
plan. If the boat has diagonals, these lines will be repre-
sented in the lines drawings of the body plan as straight
lines extending out from the centerline at various
angles. The designer feels these angles will be advanta-
geous in fairing the shape of the hull. A study of the
body plan usually shows the diagonals starting at the

--- PAGE 187 ---
Chapter 16 – Lofting
173
intersections of the waterlines and the centerline, and
somewhere out in the body plan crossing an intersec-
tion of lines, possibly that of a waterline and buttock. If
this is not the case, you will have to use whatever other
information the designer supplies to develop the diago-
nals. This may be an angle measured in degrees. Once
you have located these diagonal lines on your body
plan and have double checked them, ink them in. Use
a different ink color from that used for the other lines
and be sure the color you pick will be easily distin-
guished from the color you are using for the waterlines.
Later on, waterlines and diagonals will be coming close
together at low angles in the half breadth view of the
lofting, and you need to take care not to get them
confused. The grid is now completed.
The Sheer Line
Although some expert loftsmen lay down several lines
at one time, we find it less confusing to lay down and
fair one line at a time, making sure it is correct before
going on to another.
The first curved lines we put down in lofting a hull are
the lines which outline the profile of a boat. Usually we
begin with the sheer line. Go to the table of offsets for
the profile view, given in distances from the baseline.
Then, at each station line, carefully measure the dimen-
sions from the baseline given in the offsets. Lay a fairing
batten on these points.
To fair a line: Select or mill a batten that will bend into
a curve between the points to be faired. The object is to
get the right flex—not so stiff that the batten breaks or
moves the weights, nor so flimsy that the batten waves
and makes it difficult to lay down a fair curve. First, lay
the batten so that its edge is on the marks where the
sheer line meets the foremost and aftermost stations,
allowing equal overhang at each end. Hold it there
using either lofting weights or small nails. If you use
nails, put them beside the batten so the batten can slide
lineally when you make any corrections (i.e., never nail
the batten to the lofting). Go to the mid-station and
push the batten until its outside edge is on the mark
and secure it in position. Continue moving the batten
at the station marks, making the batten touch every
point if possible.
If there seem to be any errors at this point, i.e., the
batten is 1⁄2" (12mm) or more off a mark, we first 
check to see if we have made any errors in taking the
measurements from the offsets. If not, we then check
the lines drawing with a scale rule to see if the offsets
are correct. If it appears the designer has made a major
error in transferring the measurement from the lines
drawing to the offsets, we measure the lines drawing as
carefully as possible and transfer the new measurement
to the profile view. We also correct this in the table of
offsets.
Once we have checked for major errors, we move 
the battens off the measurement points the minimum
amounts to attain a fair curve. There is no scientific
formula for the fairness: the curve should be pleasing 
to the eye, and it should have no humps or flat spots.
The best way to check a curve is to get your eye down
level with the batten and sight along it looking for
deviations.
Take your time sighting the batten to correct any errors
in the curve. Move the batten the least amount possible
to establish a fair curve and sight along the batten again.
Once you are satisfied, draw the sheer line in ink. The
color used in drawing the buttock lines in the grid would
be good for the sheer line and other profile lines.
Other Profile Lines
The other lines which outline the profile of the boat are
the keel line and the lines for the stem. Lay these out 
in the same manner as you did the sheer line, taking
the measurements from the table of offsets and using a
batten to fair the lines. Ink the lines when they are fair.
In boats that have planking that ends in deadwood,
there will be a rabbet line. This usually shows the
shapes of the inner keel and stem and should be laid
out too. We don’t have a rabbet for the planking in 
our method of construction because we laminate the
deadwood and outer stem on the hull after planking.
The Deck Line
The next line we lay out is a half breadth, or top view,
of the deck line. The offsets for this line appear in the
table of offsets shown in half breadth from the center-
line. Transfer the measurements and fair this line as you

--- PAGE 188 ---
174
First Production Steps
did the sheer line. Double check any major errors and
then move the batten just enough so that it forms a fair,
even curve. Draw in the deck line in ink. The lines that
you have drawn so far are final, and it won’t be neces-
sary to change them during the lofting process.
Body Plan Sections
With the drawing of the grid, profile lines, and deck
line, the primary lines of the lofting are complete. The
next step is to lay out the body plan, which is the section
view of the stations. The profile lines and the deck line,
drawn in ink, will give you the height of the keel profile
above the baseline and the height and width of the sheer
at any given station. The first job is to transfer these
dimensions—as faired, not as given in the table of
offsets—from the profile and half breadth views to 
the body plan using pick-up sticks.
Pick-up sticks do just that: they pick up a dimension
from one area of the lofting and transfer it to another
area or view. They are much easier to use and provide
less chance for error than a steel measuring tape.
Pick any station to start with in transferring the profile
and sheer points to the body plan. Lay the pick-up stick
along the station line so that it is touching the block at
the baseline and the fine edge of the pick-up stick just
touches the station line. In using the pick-up sticks,
always label what station line, waterline, or other infor-
mation you are transferring. In this case, you would
write the station number and baseline on the end of the
sticks touching the baseline. Then you would mark and
label the keel profile height, the sheer height, and the
deck width. Then take the pick-up stick to the body
plan grid and lay it along the centerline, touching the
baseline block in the profile view. Mark the height of
the keel profile and sheer on the centerline. Lay out the
stations on the body plan on the same side of the
centerline as the designer has drawn them in the plans.
To locate the half breadth deck point, draw a line out at
right angles to the centerline at the height of the sheer.
Most loftsmen use the adjacent station to lay out the
sheer height and connect the two points with the
straightedge, drawing in a light pencil line. Then,
measure out from center on this line for the sheer point.
This is slightly more accurate than using a square off
the centerline. Once these points are located for a
particular station, label them according to the station
they belong to. Lay out the rest of the stations in the
same manner. These points are permanent and won’t
change until planking thickness is subtracted.
The next job, and it is a fairly big one, is to use the
table of offsets, plus the points that you have already
located, to lay out the body plan consisting of a half
section view of each station. Some loftsmen lay out all
the offsets for the body plan, measuring directly on the
body plan grid with a steel tape. Other loftsmen prefer
to lay out all of the dimensions on measuring sticks and
then transfer the information to the body plan with
these. Neither method offers a big advantage, although
it may be easier to work in one spot with a table of
offsets to mark the sticks than to climb around on the
lofting board dragging the measuring tape and the
offsets with you as you go. Whatever system you use,
label everything carefully.
If you use measuring sticks, you can put the informa-
tion for an entire station section on one measuring
stick as long as this will not result in too much confu-
sion. To do this, start at one end of the stick and use
this end as a centerline from which to lay out the
waterlines. Then use the other end of the stick as the
baseline to lay out the buttocks, using a different ink
color from that used for the waterlines. To mark the
diagonals, choose the end of the stick that is less
Figure 16-7 Lofting weights and a flexible plastic batten
being used to fair after sections on an IOR racer.

--- PAGE 189 ---
Chapter 16 – Lofting
175
crowded for the centerline and use a different ink
color. Then take the marked stick over to the body
plan grid and transfer all of the information to the
appropriate waterlines, diagonals, and buttocks.
Remember that the deck and profile have already been
faired and won’t appear on the measuring stick.
When you have laid out all the points, bend a thin
batten around them, trying to make it touch them all.
Hold it in place with small nails—on either side of the
batten, not hammered through it—or weights. If you
find gross errors, go through the checking process
explained earlier. Adjust the batten, moving it as little
as possible from the points, until you have a fair, even
curve, and then draw in the line in pencil.
Lay out the rest of the station sections in this manner.
We suggest laying down the points for only one station
section and rough fairing that station section before you
go on to another. Some station section lines will cross
each other and if points exist for several sections, this
can get somewhat confusing.
It will help a little bit when it comes to final fairing 
if you use some consistency while rough fairing the
section lines of the body plan. For example, if you
move station 3 out slightly on the load waterline and
station 2 needs correction in that area, make the correc-
tion on station 2 by moving it out slightly at the load
waterline rather than moving it in on waterline 1. By
the time the body plan is laid down, although the boat
is by no means fair yet, it is quite easy to envision the
shape. Unless a major error is found, the section of the
aftermost station in the body plan usually remains. On
the forward half of the body plan, there is sometimes 
a line close to the centerline, but not necessarily parallel
to it, which represents the thickness of the boat at 
the point where the planking ends, but before any
rounding of the stem has taken place. You need to draw
this line in also. It will later be used to determine the
distance from center of the waterlines at the point
where they run out past the stem. Some designers draw 
a light line in the profile view called a fairing line,
which will appear to be some distance ahead of the
stem, for the sole purpose of determining where the
waterlines and diagonals, if slightly extended, would
intersect with the centerline. (See Figure 16-8.)
At this point, on some hulls, we subtract planking
thickness. This procedure is discussed later in the
chapter.
Fairing the Longitudinal Lines
The next job, and it is a long one but the essence of the
lofting process, is to check the fairness of the body plan
sections using the waterlines, buttocks, and diagonals
as tools. This process will require continual
readjustment and fairing of all the lines until the
measurements and intersections correspond in all
views. The offsets will no longer be used except to
check gross errors. Instead, the dimensions will be
picked up from the lines already laid down in the
lofting.
We usually start the fairing process at the load water-
line. Select a pick-up stick that is longer than the
widest point at the load waterline of the boat. Place it
with its sharp edge touching the load waterline and one
well-squared end touching the centerline of the body
plan. Label the pick-up stick “load waterline” and label
the end that is touching the centerline “centerline.”
Being careful not to move the stick, transfer the widths
of the load waterline at each station to the stick. You
will, of course, need to lay the stick on both sides of the
body plan in order to pick up the dimensions of the
load waterline at every station in the boat. Then take
the stick to the half breadth view and use it to lay out
the waterline widths on their respective stations.
In the profile view, the load waterline will intersect the
Figure 16-8 A profile fairing line at the intersection of
projected longitudinal hull lines.
Baseline/Centerline
Fairing line 
based on 
projections 
of deck and 
waterlines
Severely radiused stem provides no
accurate control points for fairing
waterlines and diagonals

--- PAGE 190 ---
176
First Production Steps
stem or fairing line, and this intersection needs to be
transferred to the half breadth view. Place your square
perpendicular to the baseline on the point where the
load waterline intersects the stem. Project this point
down to the half breadth centerline. This will give you
the end point for the waterline in the half breadth view.
Go back to the body plan and measure the width of the
stem at this point and transfer it back to the half
breadth plan.
Then you are ready to fair the load waterline in the 
half breadth plan, following the procedures discussed
earlier. Move the batten the minimal amount off the
points until the curve looks fair and then draw in the
line using light pencil. Then remove the batten and
make a quick survey to see at which stations you had to
move it from the marks in order to fair it. Use a clean
pick-up stick to transfer these corrected load waterline
widths to the appropriate station sections in the body
plan. You now need to redraw the station sections in
the body plan to conform to the new waterline widths.
For this job, use the thin batten. Change the station
shape the minimal amount to obtain a fair curve that
touches the corrected load waterline widths. Be sure
that all station sections that need correction are
corrected before going any further.
Usually we pick up another waterline about halfway
between the load waterline and the sheer. Use the 
procedure described above for this waterline and again
make all corrections to the stations. It may be that these
connections to the station sections are significant enough
to affect the already fair area of the load waterline. This
type of discrepancy can appear throughout the lofting
process. There are no hard and fast rules as to which
lines should be adjusted if you find such an inconsis-
tency. Check your measurements and study the
relationship between your lines in the three views. As
mentioned before, visually compare the station sections
for similarity.
A good choice for the next line to fair would be a
buttock that is halfway between the centerline and the
widest point of the load waterline. If you look at the
half breadth view, you will see where the buttock inter-
sects the deck line up forward and either the deck line
or the transom aft. Using the square, transfer the inter-
section point of the buttock and the deck line to the
sheer on the profile plan. This is the forward fixed point
of the buttock. If the buttock runs out before it gets to
the last station aft, use the same process in the stern to
transfer the buttock point to the sheer. If the body plan
shows that the buttock intersects the last station, it is
just a matter of picking up the distance from the baseline
to where the buttock intersects the last station section
and transferring that to the last station in profile.
Place a clean pick-up stick along the buttock line in the
body plan so that one end touches the baseline and the
sharp edge is touching the buttock line. As with the
waterline, label what buttock line the stick represents
and label the end of the stick that touches the baseline
as “base.” Mark all the heights of the station sections,
labeling which mark represents which station, and
transfer all of these distances to their respective stations
in the profile view. Now place a batten on the profile
view touching the buttock mark at each station and
sight it for fairness.
On most buttocks, bending one batten around the
shape of the buttocks may be a problem. On most
hulls, buttocks tend to run with just slight curve in the
midsection of the hull and swoop up sharply towards
the bow and the stern where the buttock runs out on
the sheer. We usually fair the middle of the buttock 
line first, using the same batten that we used to fair the
sheer, and draw a light pencil line along it slightly past
the point where the buttock starts to swoop up sharply.
Then we remove this batten and use a smaller batten to
fair the buttock where it curves more sharply, carefully
fairing it into the straighter portion of the buttock. You
will find, especially in long, skinny hulls, that as the
buttock swoops up sharply, that area of the buttock
loses most of its effectiveness in fairing the hull due to
the low angle at which it intersects the sections in the
body plan.
Use the same process for fairing the buttock that you
used on the waterline. If, when the buttock is faired, it
is off points that you have picked up from the body
plan, you must then change the body plan to coincide
with the new location of the buttock line at that station.
Again, make all of the changes on the body plan before
going any further. If there is any major change that 
will highly distort the body plan in order to make it

--- PAGE 191 ---
Chapter 16 – Lofting
177
conform to the buttock, then the buttock will have to
be changed again. What you are looking for is that all
of the lines that you put on the half breadth and the
profile view are fair and, when the distances from the
center or baseline to these lines are transferred to the
body plan at each section, the body plan is also fair.
The next line we would pick to fair would be a
diagonal that intersects the hull somewhere between
the load waterline and the keel. This diagonal section
view will also use the half breadth baseline as its center-
line. At this point, some loftsmen like to draw a line
parallel to the baseline and intersecting the station lines,
but on the opposite edge of the lofting floor, using this
line as a centerline for the diagonals to keep them
separate from the waterlines. Because diagonal sections
are sometimes very similar in shape to the waterline
sections, using a common centerline might become
confusing. However, we usually use the baseline as the
centerline for the diagonals because later on it will be
quicker to pick up information necessary for manufac-
turing various parts of the boat.
Laying out a section view of the diagonal is similar to
laying out a waterline. The diagonal will intersect the
item and transom at certain heights above the baseline.
For the stem, this might be on a waterline, making
things very easy. Just follow that waterline to the point
where it intersects the stem in profile. If it is not on a
waterline, as in Figure 16-9, take the measurement
height y from the baseline to the intersection of the
diagonal and the centerline in the body plan (point r).
Take this distance y to the profile view and mark off the
intersection with the stem (point r). Then use the
square to drop a line vertically down to the baseline to
locate the point at which the diagonal starts (r).
For fairing the transom intersection, you need to use
the point where the diagonal intersects the outside edge
of the transom (point s). In our example, this would be
at height x above the baseline. Transfer this distance x
to the profile view and determine where it intersects
with the transom (point s). Project this point down to
the half breadth view (s1). Pick up distance z from the
body plan, measured along the diagonal from centerline
to transom line. Mark distance z perpendicular to s1 in
the half breadth plan to get the point s representing the
intersection of the transom’s edge and the diagonal B.
You will fair the diagonal to this point.
Now lay the pick-up stick with its sharp edge just
touching the diagonal on the body plan and one end
touching the intersection of the diagonal to the center-
line. Label the stick according to which diagonal it is
and which end touches the centerline. Then, mark the
distance from center of each of the stations on the stick
and label. Do this, of course, on both sides of the body
plan so that all stations are included on the pick up
stick. Then transfer these distances to their respective
stations in the half breadth plan, labeling them in light
pencil as you transfer them.
Follow the standard fairing procedure of placing a
batten on the marks and checking for fairness, moving
the batten the minimal amount possible so that it forms
an even, smooth curve. Draw the line in light pencil
and make corrections to the body plan at the stations
where the batten had to be moved from the marks to
lie fair. If several sections of the body plan have to be
grossly changed in order to conform to the diagonal
section, the diagonal may have to be readjusted in that
area in order to fair the hull.
It is now just a matter of going through this fairing
process with the rest of the diagonals, buttocks, and
waterlines that shape the hull. Since everything is still
being drawn in light pencil, take care in labeling all the
lines to keep track of what’s what. As mentioned before,
there will undoubtedly be some necessary changes that
will affect some of the lines that have already been
faired. An example would be in fairing a diagonal that
is close to a buttock that is already faired. In order to
get the diagonal to lie fair, you may have to change a
couple of station sections, which, in order to keep the
station sections fair, might necessitate altering one of
the buttocks lying close to the diagonals. This sounds
like work, and it is. Any adjustment may necessitate re-
fairing of other lines, but at this point the changes will
be quite small to make everything fair. Care in lofting
will pay off in ease of planking.
In some respects, lofting reminds us of sanding a hull
and getting ready to paint it, in that a decision has to be
made as to when to stop. Most people are quite happy
if they achieve plus-or-minus 1⁄16" (1mm) accuracy in the
lofting. In special boats built to a rule, we usually carry it
out finer than this, trying to be as accurate as possible so
the boat will fall within the designed specifications of the
class in which it is racing.

--- PAGE 192 ---
178
First Production Steps
Once you have completed the fairing process, ink all of
the waterlines, buttocks, and diagonals. Use the same
ink color that you used to represent these lines in the
grid and label all of the lines so that they are easily
identified. Also ink the body plan, although the stations
that will be used to make mold frames or bulkheads, etc.
will go through a planking thickness deduction process.
Lofting Hull Components
When the basic fairing of the hull lines is finished, the
lines on the lofting board very accurately describe the
shape of the hull at any given point. In addition to
giving the shapes for the permanent frames, bulkheads,
and temporary molds, the lofting can be used to
develop special patterns for the stem and keel, jigs for
laminating, hardware, etc. There are a number of refer-
ences to such uses of the lofting throughout this book.
If this is your first boatbuilding project, we recommend
that you read the entire book and note the references
that apply to your boat. This will ensure that you make
maximum use of the lofting. Using the lofting as a tool,
you can now develop the shape of parts so that you can
manufacture them to fit accurately in their respective
areas of the hull.
For instance, if a bulkhead falls between stations 3 and
4, erect a perpendicular line from the baseline at the
location of the bulkhead. Place a clean pick-up stick
along this line with one end touching the baseline and
the sharp edge of the stick just touching the bulkhead
line. Using one ink color, pick up the keel profile height
of each buttock and the height of the sheer above the
baseline. Using another ink color, pick up the distances
from the centerline to the deckline and to all of the
waterlines. You should, of course, be labeling all of the
marks as you are making them. Using another ink
color, pick up the distances of the diagonals from the
centerline. Then take this pick-up stick to the body
plan and transfer all the information as you have done
previously to develop the station sections. Using a thin
batten, draw in this new section, which will represent
the shape of the hull at the location of the bulkhead
before planking thickness is subtracted.
Figure 16-9  Laying off diagonals.
Oblique view for illustration only
Locating ends of the diagonals
Pick up these dimensions from the centerline out along the diagonal to
the station intersections. Transfer them to the appropriate stations
in the half breadth plan to be faired.
These heights from
the body plan give the
intersection of the
diagonal plane B with
the profile.

--- PAGE 193 ---
Chapter 16 – Lofting
179
To summarize, it is just a matter of drawing a perpen-
dicular to locate the part which you want to develop
and then picking up distances from the centerline or
baseline to the waterlines, diagonals, and buttocks
which will best help develop the shape of the part.
Developing an Angled 
Flat Transom or Bulkhead
If the boat has a flat transom or bulkhead that is at an
angle from the vertical, you have to take a few extra
steps to develop the shape of such a part. Figure 16-10
shows the revolution and development of a flat raked
transom, but it could represent an angled bulkhead for
chainplates or stay tangs.
The first step is to locate the intersection of the water-
lines, sheer, and keel with the transom in the profile
view. Using a big square, project the lines at right angles
to the transom profile at the points (a,b,c). It is a good
idea to check the spacing for accuracy at the outboard
end of these projections, which you can do quickly and
easily with a pick-up stick.
Using the transom profile (or a line parallel to it, as in
Figure 16-10) as a centerline, draw in lines to represent
buttocks as they appear in the body plan grid (Buttock
spacing R). You will now have a grid that resembles the
body plan, with the waterline spacing expanded.
Now pick up the distances from the centerline out to
the intersection of the waterlines (and sheer) and the
transom line (A, B, C). These measurements can be
made on either the half breadth (as shown) or body
plan views. Set off the measurements on the correspon-
ding waterlines in the transom grid (A, B, C).
Next locate the intersections of the buttock lines and
transom in the profile view. Project perpendiculars from
these points on the transom profile out to where they
intersect their corresponding buttocks in the expanded
transom view. Take care to project these points
accurately.
You will now have a set of points (a, b, c, d, e, f,
g) that describe the true size of the transom. Pick up
the flexible batten that you used for the other station
sections and, using weights or small nails, make it touch
all the points marked on the temporary grid. The profile
point at the keel will be where the special station line
intersects the profile line. Slight inaccuracies may have
crept in during the development of the section, in which
Figure 16-10 Developing a raked flat transom.
Half breadth dimensions
of waterlines at transom
Grid spacing of
buttocks lines

--- PAGE 194 ---
180
First Production Steps
case you may have to move the batten slightly in order
to make the section fair. If there is a major error, go
back and check through the development process. When
everything is right, this transom or angled bulkhead will
look similar to the vertical stations on either side,
although it will be expanded or more drawn out.
Curved Transom Development
It is quite common with bigger boats to have a transom
that is both curved and raked, either forward or aft, at
an appreciable angle. To develop transoms of this shape
is a little complicated, but the following instructions
and Figure 16-11 provide a fairly standard method.
The basic principles involved in the development of the
curved raked transom are most easily understood if you
consider the transom as being part of a cylinder. As with
the cylinder, it is curved in one direction (athwartship)
and straight in the other (fore and aft or vertical).
Looking at the lines plan, you will see that the buttock
planes intersect the transom as straight lines, these
being elements of the cylinder. You will use these
buttocks as you expand or roll out the transom from its
curved shape to a flat one.
The first thing to do is to project an auxiliary view of
the after sections of the boat and deck line at a line of
sight parallel to the centerline of the transom in profile.
(See Figure 16-11.) Begin by extending the centerline of
the transom in profile up clear of the other views. As
close to the other drawing as possible, draw in an auxil-
iary grid centerline at right angles to this extended line.
Tangent to this intersection, swing an arc of the radius
noted on the designer’s plans for the transom. This is
the curve to which the transom will be laminated when
it is built. Measuring out from the auxiliary centerline,
draw in the buttocks parallel to this centerline, spaced
as they are in the half breadth plan (a, b, c, d). Then
project the points where the auxiliary buttocks intersect
the design arc of the transom down from this auxiliary
view to the corresponding buttocks in the profile view.
It is also necessary to determine the true intersection 
of the sheer and the transom in this auxiliary view. To
do this, first project the intersections of the aft two (or
three) station lines with the profile sheer up into the
view. These projections will intersect the auxiliary
centerline at 90°. Pick up from the half breadth plan 
the distance from the centerline to the deck line or the
aft sections. Transfer these dimensions to the auxiliary
view, from the centerline out along the station projec-
tions. Fair a batten through these marks. This sheer 
line will intersect the arc of the transom.
Next, prepare the grid for the expanded transom. You
can use the transom centerline in the profile view as 
the centerline for the grid or draw a centerline parallel
to it but a little away to keep things clear. Lay a batten
around the arc in the auxiliary view and pick up the
buttock spacing (a, b, c, d) and the point where 
the arc intersects the deck line. Then transfer these
distances, laying the batten straight and at right angles
to the expanded transom centerline. Draw in the
buttocks parallel to the centerline and also lightly draw
the line (parallel to the buttocks) that represents the
intersection of the deck line and the transom (e). This
gives one half the true width of the transom if it were
laid flat. Go back and identify the points in the profile
view where the projections of the buttocks from the
auxiliary view intersect the buttocks. Project these
points (m, n, o, p) out to the expanded transom grid,
where their intersections with their respective buttocks
will outline the shape of the transom.
If more points are needed for accuracy in developing
the shape of the outside edge of the transom, add more
buttocks to the body plan in between the standard
buttocks. Using a pick-up stick, transfer the heights for
the last three stations to the profile view. Then follow
the process used with the primary buttocks to get the
additional points.
It will be necessary to know the amount of deck crown,
so this, too, should be projected. Some designers give
the amount of deck crown as a percentage of beam at
any point, while others give a centerline that runs above
the sheer line to show the amount of deck crown. We
generally allow slightly more material on the transom
than is necessary for the deck camber by lightly drawing
a line parallel to the sheer, but above it, at least as high
as the deck camber will be at the stern. Draw this line
far enough to intersect the projected profile centerline
of the raked transom. From this point of intersection,
draw another line to the intersection of the deck line 
in the outer corner of the transom. Give this line more

--- PAGE 195 ---
Chapter 16 – Lofting
181
Figure 16-11 Developing a curved raked transom.
Expanded Transom
Auxiliary View
Profile
Half breadth

--- PAGE 196 ---
182
First Production Steps
curve than would appear on the standard profile plan to
allow for plenty of fairing material on the transom.
Looking at the previous work, note that the buttock
lines projected down from the auxiliary view intersect
the top of the transom in the profile view. Project these
intersections out to the respective buttocks on the grid
for the expanded transom. Connect the dots with a
flexible batten. This will allow more than enough
material for fairing. Later on in construction we make a
template of the exact deck crown at the point where the
transom meets the deck line. This, along with the other
deck beams installed in the boat, allows us to use a
batten to accurately fair the edge where the deck meets
the transom.
Further reading on transom development, as well as on
other lofting specialties, can be found in the sources
listed at the beginning of this chapter.
Subtracting Planking Thickness
Boats are lofted to the outer thickness of their planking.
Before you can build any interior frames or molds, you
need to subtract this planking thickness from the body
plan and special bulkhead layouts. We usually do this
as we lay down the body plan and before we fair in 
its lines. This 