ovide the main support with smaller longitudinal
stringers for further support. The stringers are
sometimes minimized or left out if they don’t serve a
definite structural purpose. The second method uses a
series of large, longitudinal beams with smaller beams
bent over the longitudinal beams in the athwartship
direction. Generally, the second method is preferred on
boats with wider decks, especially large keelboats. The
first method is commonly used on boats with narrower
decks, such as multihulls.
Longitudinal Deck Beam Concept
In the old carvel planked boats, the decks were planked
just like hulls, and athwartship deck beams made a lot
of sense. When using plywood instead of planking as a
decking material, however, the structural function of
the deck beam changes. Deck beams used to be bolted
carefully to a clamp and shelf arrangement to hold the
two sheers together. Now, plywood decking bonded to
340
Later Production Steps
Figure 27-4  Geometric layout for deck camber.
A semicircle with its
radius A equal 
to the maximum
camber at the 
CL of deck.
Divide a 90° arc into
equal spacings.
Divide the base line into the same number
of sections as the arc  2  then join the
corresponding points (as B, C, D) from 
the CL out.
On the deck beam stock lay out the true
width of the deck (half is shown for clarity).
Erect the camber height A as a perpendicular at the CL.
Then mark each half of the baseline, from the centerline
to sheer, into the same number of sections as  2 . At
these sections mark off the corresponding dimensions
B, C, D perpendicular to the baseline. Finely fair a batten
through your marks on both sides of the CL to obtain
your deck camber curve.

--- PAGE 355 ---
the sheers serves the same function and does a much
better job in the process.
The major function of framework for decks is the same
as for hulls: to best support the surface skin so that it
will not buckle under high loads. The major loading on
deck structures for many boats is longitudinal in nature,
so it makes sense to orient a significant portion of the
deck framework in a longitudinal fashion to help carry
these loads.
The longitudinal beam concept has been used very
successfully on many boats, and it has some practical
side benefits. 
1. Most interior traffic is fore and aft. Keeping
athwartship deck beams to a minimum size increases
the amount of headroom available for a given dimen-
sion of the vessel.
2. The longitudinal beam concept can simplify deck
framework construction.
3. Properly positioned, the longitudinal beams can
become strong points to which you can install major
deck hardware for maximum loading potential.
Examples of longitudinal deck beam construction are
shown in Figures 27-5 and 27-6.
The deck framing of the 42' (12.8m) sailboat shown in
Figure 27-5 begins with the installation of four
laminated longitudinal beams measuring about 11⁄2" 
4" (38mm  100mm). We set them in proper position,
using the existing bulkhead deck profiles and the sheer
as the main measurement references. If necessary, we
prop up the beams temporarily with posts from the
floor of the hull, especially in places where they might
sag a bit between bulkheads. We normally set the
beams in place, keeping them fair to the eye as they are
sighted longitudinally. We can check the positioning of
the longitudinal beams at any station point that we
desire with the template of the deck crown. When the
longitudinals are in proper position, installing the rest
of the deck framework is relatively easy.
We sawed the athwartship frames (shown in Figure 27-
5) out of straight timber stock and they measured 13⁄8"
 3⁄4" (35mm  18mm). We then simply bent this
stock around the four longitudinal beams to form a
naturally curved deck crown that ended up being
accurate enough so that little fairing was required.
We notched the athwartship beams as well as the longi-
tudinal beams into the sheer clamp. The sheer notch,
however, is of the triangular type where the athwartship
beam is held captive and given complete support. (See
Figure 27-7.) The triangular notch is a fast and efficient
Chapter 27 – Deck Construction
341
Figure 27-5 Longitudinal and smaller athwartship beams on
Golden Dazy.
Figure 27-6 Foredeck framing for a 1⁄2 ton racer. Longitudinals
will carry cabin sides and a hanging cockpit.

--- PAGE 356 ---
method of joining deck beams to the sheer clamp, and
we have used this method for many years. We also use
this method in a number of other areas where wood
members need to be joined at approximate right angles.
To make a notch, first mark the dimension of the notch
on the stock. The two critical dimensions of the notch
are its length and depth. These dimensions will deter-
mine the bevel that the notch will take. The width of
the notch will be determined by the width of the stick
to be notched in. Saw the two sides of the notch to the
marked lines, using a fine-toothed handsaw. Remove
the stock between the saw cuts with a chisel and true
up the notch with a file.
You now only need to fit the frame or stringer to the
existing notch. This involves transferring the bevel and
the notch to the member to be fitted for a good mating.
Cut the bevel on the ends to be fitted at the proper
length, allowing the member to sit in proper final
resting position in the notch. After the parts are
properly fitted, bond them in place, using a thick
adhesive mixture that will fill any gaps in the notch that
may inadvertently exist between the members.
You can also use longitudinal beams to advantage as
structural members to which to attach the cockpit or
cabin sides. In Figure 27-9, the four longitudinal beams
serve as supporting framework from which to hang a
unique slingshot-shaped cockpit. We accomplished this
by first installing the cockpit itself and then clamping
the longitudinal beams to the various sides of the
cockpit at the proper height. Also note the use of sawn-
to-shape half beams in the athwartship direction in the
cockpit area. These half beams span the short distance
from the sheer to the longitudinal beams. They are
fitted at each end, using the triangular notched method.
342
Later Production Steps
Figure 27-7  Cutting a triangular notch
Figure 27-8  Triangular notches were cut into a laminated
beam before it was bonded to the plywood frame.
Longitudinal deck stringers were then easy to fit into the
notches.
Figure 27-9  A hanging cockpit supported by longitudinal
beams.
This method of
notching for deck
beams uses the high
shear strength of the
epoxy to advantage
while maintaining the
integrity of the carling
or sheer clamp.
The accuracy of this intersection is important.
If the deck beam stands proud of the notch,
you are losing strength in the joint and the
deck beam because the high parts get removed
during fairing.

--- PAGE 357 ---
Laminated Deck Beams
More traditional laminated beams serve as the main
support of the deck framework shown in Figure 27-11.
The unusual shape of this deck made the longitudinal
beam concept impractical. We lofted the heavily curved
blister deck to determine the correct shape of each beam
and then laminated the beams on the lofting floor using
the block-on-floor method described in Chapter 11.
Because it’s difficult to work on the undersides of decks,
we prefinish all deck framing members. In this case, we
shaped and coated the laminated beams and installed
them with triangular notches at the sheers. To set each
beam in proper position, we used the sheer dimensions
on each side and the height at the centerline as refer-
ence points, measuring the height from a string that ran
parallel to the waterline on the interior of the boat.
Using standard hull fairing techniques, we faired the
beams and notched smaller 1"  3⁄4" (25mm  18mm)
longitudinal stringers into each one. The deck had too
much compound curvature to be covered with sheet
ply, so we laminated two layers of 12" wide, 3⁄16" (5mm)
plywood strips for a total deck thickness of 3⁄8" (9mm).
Cockpit Construction and Installation
Before installing any deck framework, we usually build
the cockpit and set it in position. In most cases, it’s
easier to fit deck framing around the cockpit than to fit
the cockpit around deck beams. Even if the two
methods were equal, it’s usually easier to fabricate the
cockpit on the shop floor and install it as a unit than it
is to build it from many pieces inside the cramped
working quarters of the hull.
Chapter 27 – Deck Construction
343
Figure 27-10  Laminated deck beams with centerline blocking
and a hardwood cap. At right are blocking and a stanchion for
a deck-stepped spar.
Figure 27-11 Laminated frames and 1"  3⁄4" (25mm 
18mm) stringers used as framing for a blister-type deck on 
a 1⁄2 ton racer. Note the plywood mast partner for a keel-
stepped spar.
Figure 27-12 A cockpit assembly constructed outside the hull.
Figure 27-13 An unusual slingshot-shaped cockpit is set in
place on Golden Dazy. It is trued up with temporary bracing
and blocking. Then the deck framework is installed around its
perimeter.

--- PAGE 358 ---
We always begin cockpit construction by building the
cockpit floor. The cockpit floor, like the floor of a
house, serves as a foundation on which to erect the
walls. We favor sandwich construction with a honey-
comb core for cockpit floors, but a standard
framework-supported floor similar to that used on the
deck also works well. After we have constructed the
floor, we saw cockpit sidewalls of appropriate plywood
thickness and bond them to the completed floor to
form a ready-to-install cockpit, as shown in Figure 27-12.
344
Later Production Steps
Figure 27-14 Golden Dazy’s cockpit, viewed from the bow.
Figure 27-15  A typical cockpit seat section detail.
Figure 27-16  Cockpit construction details.
Built-up coaming
with teak cap
Hinged-top wet locker
Deck beam
Carling
Limber hole
Beam
Sole
Plywood lip
Cockpit sides
Deck
Beam
Sides attached with sole dropped down
onto cleats for bonding.
Molding/cap
Plywood cockpit sides
Fillet
Epoxy/Filler
Cleat
Honeycomb
core
Optional fillet permits easy
cleaning (sole can be painted)
Cockpit sides with cleat attached
to support cockpit sole
Frame built into panel/core cockpit sole
is relieved slightly. This allows the
builder to visually inspect the joint as
thickened epoxy is forced into the void.
Plywood
Honeycomb core
Cockpit sole and sides pre-
assembled then fastened to
longitudinal stringer.
Deck
Deckbeam
Stringer
Plywood sides
Sole
Beam
Shelf or cleat carrying
cockpit sole beams

--- PAGE 359 ---
The cockpit may be much more elaborate than this,
with seats and lockers underneath. You can also add
these before you install the whole unit in the hull.
Positioning the cockpit in the hull is not difficult. It
must be centered and set at the right height in relation
to the sheer dimension or possibly to a waterline.
Usually, there is at least one bulkhead in the vicinity of
the cockpit, and you can cut this out to the exact
dimension of the cockpit shape and use it as a
positioning point for placement of the cockpit. With
this initial support, you can true up the cockpit to the
final dimension required. You may need temporary
support to hold the cockpit in proper position until you
can install enough deck framework to hold the cockpit
installation rigidly in place.
Decking Over
To final fair the deck framework, use essentially the
same methods that are used to fair up a hull. Because
the deck surface is almost flat in comparison to the
curves on a hull, it is easy to see and correct imperfec-
tions, so fairing the deck framework is much less
difficult than fairing a hull. Long-bed hand planes are
ideal for fairing up this large, flat surface area. A large
plywood batten measuring about 1' wide  8' long
(300mm  2.4m) also helps indicate how the plywood
will lie on the various frame members.
After the deck framework is faired, it is ready for the
plywood decking. Decking thickness depends upon a
number of factors, such as boat size and type, amount
and spacing of supportive deck framework, and the
type of service that the boat is likely to see. Generally,
decks don’t have to be as thick as hulls. A hull must be
thick enough to withstand impact loads of hitting
floating debris and the constant hydrodynamic loads of
waves. The heaviest potential load on a deck is from a
large boarding sea, and this enormous load, while
awesome, is not particularly high on a pounds-per-
square-foot basis when compared with the loads that a
hull must withstand.
For most decks, the human body presents the greatest
concentrated load the deck will ever have to withstand.
Thus, our minimum criterion for a successful deck is
that it be strong and stiff enough to prevent any
substantial deflection when it is walked upon. A contin-
ually deflecting deck is likely to have a short life span,
failing through fatigue at an inopportune moment.
In the end, there are no firm guidelines for deck thick-
ness. If you use thin plywood, you will need more frames;
if you use thick plywood, you will need fewer frames. A
thin skin with a number of lightweight frames is lighter
than a thicker plywood deck, but it also takes more
time to build. We covered the deck framework for the
42' (12.8m) Golden Dazy, shown in Figure 27-5, with
two layers of 1⁄4" (6mm) plywood and laid 1⁄8" (3mm)
teak laminate over the ply. The resulting 5⁄8" (9mm) deck
was considerably thinner than Dazy’s 11⁄8" (28.5mm)
thick hull. The frame-supported deck on Rogue Wave, a
60' (18.2m) trimaran, on the other hand, was only 3⁄8"
(9mm) thick. Many small day racers have well-supported
1⁄8" to 3⁄16" plywood decking. Ollie’s deck is 5-ply 1⁄4"
plywood over light deck beams at 7" (175mm) spacings.
Apply plywood decking in the same manner that you
apply plywood panels to the hull framework in
standard hard chine construction. (See Chapter 24.) As
is the problem with hulls, decks normally present too
large an area to cover easily with one prescarfed panel.
Therefore, we apply the largest-sized panels that we can
cut out of a 4'  8' (1200mm  2400mm) sheet of
plywood and join them in place on the deck, using a
deck beam or stringer as the point at which to make a
scarf joint. Planning the scarf positioning may be a little
bit more difficult on a deck than on a hull because of
potential obstructions that must be fitted to, such as the
cabin walls, hatches, and cockpit. Because the under-
side of the deck will be seen by all, try to do the best
Chapter 27 – Deck Construction
345
Figure 27-17  The foredeck and beam fairings on Rogue Wave
are plywood over stringers. The cabin areas are sandwich
construction using resin-coated paper honeycomb core.

--- PAGE 360 ---
job you can to hide the scarfs on top of a beam or
bulkhead, particularly if you plan a natural finish.
Figure 27-18 shows a method for applying a plywood
panel to a compounded surface. We usually staple
plywood, working along imaginary lines from the
center out to the corners to minimize distortion. First
we divide a panel into quarters and then into eighths
and sixteenths until it is fastened around its perimeter.
Scarfing in place has advantages when applying
plywood to decks. As we have pointed out previously,
most decks have a small degree of compound curve
which might cause some installation problems if you
were to install a solid panel over the whole deck
surface. This slight compound curvature is easily dissi-
pated within the scarf joints when you apply many
smaller panels over the same surface.
Sandwich-Constructed Decks
With certain types of boats, a sandwich or core-
constructed deck system may be advantageous. This
uses the basic principle of separating two load-bearing
skins with a core material. The main advantage of this
type of deck is the smooth, unencumbered inner surface
of the underside of the deck. The absence of any frame-
work provides a surface which is easy to finish and,
when complete, easier to keep clean. In addition, the
sandwich deck provides a significant improvement in
thermal and sound insulation properties over a
standard frame-supported deck system. In hot climates,
a deck that does not transmit heat from the sun can be
a significant feature. It is also possible to build a lighter
deck with the sandwich technique; however, this is
dependent upon the application. It is our opinion that
in most situations it is very difficult, on a weight-to-
strength or weight-to-stiffness basis, to improve upon a
well-designed frame-supported deck system.
Sandwich-constructed decks present added construc-
tion difficulties. For most boats, a sandwich-constructed
deck takes longer to build than a frame-supported type
and is also probably more difficult to execute by those
with limited experience. A practical disadvantage of the
sandwich deck is limited versatility when positioning
deck hardware. Before you complete the sandwich
deck, you must know the position of all deck hardware
so that you can remove core material in the area of
specific hardware items and replace it with appropriate
solid blocking. Later, if you want to add some hardware
items or move others to different locations, it will be
difficult to do. With the open frame deck, you can add
more blocking easily to the underside of the deck
wherever it is needed. 
346
Later Production Steps
Figure 27-18 Foredeck framing for a 1⁄2 ton racer.
Longitudinals will carry cabin sides and a hanging cockpit.
Figure 27-19  Fitting and scarfing the 3⁄16" (5mm) plywood
deck on the main hull of the proa Slingshot. Note the pads
and blocking for hardware that are fit between stringers 
and frames.
Staple plywood deck panels
from the center out to the
corners. This will minimize
distortion and rippling from
the compounding of the
plywood.

--- PAGE 361 ---
Figure 27-20 shows the core-constructed deck as used
on the aft deck of a large multihull. This is a good
application for the core deck because there is limited
camber in the deck profile and very little hardware is to
be installed. This boat will also spend a good portion of
her time in the tropics where the added insulation value
is important. We began the deck construction outside
the boat on a large prescarfed 1⁄8" (3mm) thick piece of
plywood that was prefitted to the deck perimeter and
then set on a flat surface for further work. We
positioned beams of 3⁄4" (18mm) thick stock, with a
deck camber cut on the top, athwartship every 2'
(600mm). We installed one longitudinal beam along the
centerline by blocking in with 2' long pieces of the
same 3⁄4" stock. Then we positioned this partially
constructed assembly on the hull on top of false sheer
clamps. Next we bonded resin-coated paper honey-
comb in place between the 3⁄4" wood frames, using a
thick, syrupy adhesive mixture to bond the honeycomb
only to the 1⁄8" plywood bottom. We faired the honey-
comb core down to the precut camber on the wood
beams, using long fairing blocks with 50-grit
sandpaper. We used long battens to fair up the entire
deck surface, correcting any highs or lows in the wood
beam members in the process. Finally, we bonded 1⁄4"
(6mm) plywood over this faired surface, using standard
size 4'  8' (1200mm  2400mm) panels to their best
advantage with precut scarf joints and splicing the
various panels together in place right on the deck
surface.
Another core deck system is shown in Figure 27-21. This
deck for a 26' (7.9m) monohull was on a flat floor. We
laid out the accurate perimeter of the entire deck on the
floor and then transferred it to a prescarfed 1⁄8" panel of
plywood that had been prefinished on its underside.
We then made cutouts in the plywood for the forward
hatch, the cabin, and the cockpit areas. We next fit the
resulting plywood deck base with 1⁄4" thick plywood
beams spaced on 3" (75mm) centers. We cut these beams
mostly from scrap plywood, using the mechanical tram
method to develop a proper arc on each beam in a pro-
duction-type set-up. Although this part looks laborious,
one man cut the 104 beams needed in one day.
Installation of the beams on the plywood surface was
easy, as we bonded each individual beam to a
premarked position. We applied a bead of thickened
adhesive to the bottom of each beam. We then set the
beam in position and held it there with temporary
staples at each end until a cure was complete. We made
a small fillet between the beam and the plywood by
smoothing out the excess adhesive that had squeezed
out from between the two members. We then placed
this premanufactured deck base on top of the hull and
bonded it to the sheer clamps. The cabin sides, a
preconstructed cockpit, hatch framework, and all
hardware blocking were installed in the deck base
before we final faired the deck for decking over. For
final fairing, we used a long sanding block with 50-grit
paper and a hand plane to cut down a frame, or added
blocking to one that was abnormally low.
Chapter 27 – Deck Construction
347
Figure 27-20  The aft deck on Rogue Wave with a 3" (75mm)
thick honeycomb core between plywood panels.
Figure 27-21  Scrap strips of plywood are used as core
framing for a sandwich deck.

--- PAGE 362 ---
After we had completed the final fairing, we covered
the deck over with 3⁄16" (4mm) ply with stapling
pressure applied out at the sheers, in perimeters around
hatches, cabins, etc. Because of the natural deck curve,
we needed very little pressure to hold the plywood
down flush against the ribs. In areas where contact
seemed limited between deck and beam, we applied
weights to the deck surface to hold it down until a cure
was effected. We made scarf joints in place on the deck
so that only standard size panels were applied at one
time. We designed all scarf joints so that the center of
the scarf joint occurred over one of the deck beams.
Applying the adhesive to the small 1⁄4" (6mm) edge of
each of the 104 small deck beams was tedious, and we
used a common cake decorator-applicator. The cake
decorator can apply a very thick adhesive mixture in
controlled amounts and in proper position to provide
the best bond between deck beam and deck surface.
Blocking for Hardware
Hardware can develop extremely high stress concentra-
tions on a deck that must be adequately distributed
throughout the structure. Some hardware items are
more critical than others: the blocking for a major
winch, for example, will have to be more substantial
than the blocking for a simple cleat. It’s difficult to
decide how much blocking to use; to make a judgment,
evaluate the loads on a given fitting and the direction—
straight up or parallel to the deck, for instance—in
which they are applied. Blocking is integral to the
success of the hardware bonding techniques described
in Chapter 14.
With frame-supported decks, blocking is usually
installed by extending it to all surrounding framework
and carefully bonding it to get the best load distribu-
tion. Thus, the framework pattern may affect your
hardware location. The ideal location of the winch, as
shown in Figure 27-22, is in the center of the frame-
work in order to distribute its load over the greatest
area. If the winch were located toward one side of the
blocked-in box, it would reduce the load distribution
potential of the deck-supporting framework, relying on
the closest framework for a majority of support.
Because of its multidirectional laminations, plywood is
an excellent blocking material to distribute loads over a
wide area. It is used in a majority of situations. Blocking
is a good place to use all of your small scrap pieces of
plywood. You can also use standard sawn wood stock
for blocking, especially where you want to direct high
loads over an immediate area such as would be done
when blocking for sail track. In contrast to the old
methods of blocking, we do not use high-density hard-
woods, but substitute lower density Sitka spruce or
Douglas fir. These softwoods are adequate if you use
the hardware bonding techniques detailed earlier in this
book.
348
Later Production Steps
Figure 27-22 Hardware blocking details.
Figure 27-23  Sawn Sitka spruce blocking is bonded to core
deck at all structural frames and planed flush with the deck
profile. Note the strip of blocking for adjustable sail leads to
the left.
Decking
Winch located on
blocking so as to
optimize load distri-
bution to deck beam
Deck beam
Plywood blocking
Spruce blocking
aligned with direction
of load on winch,
turning block, sheet
stoppers, etc.
Deck beams

--- PAGE 363 ---
Most blocking is easiest to install before the plywood
decking goes on. With core decks, the blocking must all
be installed before the final layer of plywood is bonded
in place. It is much easier to fit, install, and fair in the
blocking to the bare deck framework than to install it
laboriously from the underside of a capped-over deck.
Sometimes, however, it’s difficult to complete your deck
hardware layout plan until the deck is fully completed
and you can study it for a while. If this is the case,
you’re probably better off installing blocking for those
items later on from underneath the completed deck,
rather than installing it wrong and having to chisel out
blocking that is not needed (if you’re like us and can’t
stand to sail with unnecessary weight).
Cabin Construction
For construction purposes, the cabin is really an exten-
sion of the deck. It increases standing headroom and
provides a place for windows or ports that will let in
light and fresh air below. Cabins are always installed
after the deck has been at least framed in, and usually
after the deck has been completed. Design the deck
framework with an opening for the cabin and sufficient
framework around the opening perimeter for attaching
the cabin walls. You will have to pre-bevel to the degree
desired for the cabin walls.
Plywood is the most common material for making
cabin sides. It should be thick enough to stand on its
own with no further frame support for minimal deflec-
tion. You may laminate the walls out of several layers of
plywood or veneers to get a desired precurved shape
that might be difficult to form with a single piece of
thicker ply. It is common to laminate the front wall of
the cabin to provide attractive curves and improve
windage. As we mentioned in Chapter 23, cabins can
also be built with strip composite techniques.
Fitting cabin walls can be tricky. It is a good idea to
make patterns of cheap paneling and then carefully cut
the cabin walls to the exact pattern size before final
fitting and installation. It is usual to install the walls of
the cabin first and then join the corners with an appro-
priate wood gusset that has enough bonding area for a
strong joint.
The most difficult part of building cabins is to establish
a cabin top sheer-line dimension. This may be a difficult
dimension to take from the plans, and it is complicated
by the fact that the type and shape of the cabin roof
that is installed might dictate some of the final sheer
Chapter 27 – Deck Construction
349
Figure 27-24  All spaces between the blocking in the deck
shown in Figure 27-23 were filled with honeycomb core.
Figure 27-25  A sandwich deck with all of the framing and
honeycomb core in place before the top plywood deck surface
was laid.

--- PAGE 364 ---
line dimensions. For cabin tops with frame-supported
roofs, build the frame using the same technique used
for decking. Cover the framework over with sheet ply,
or laminate it with strips of ply or veneer.
Because cabin tops are smaller and sometimes have
more compound curves than decks, building a core-
constructed cabin top or even a solid molded cabin top
offers interesting alternatives to the frame system. Either
one of these methods provides maximum headroom
with a clear underside surface and no beams on which
to hit your head. The only problem with these two
options is that you must first mold the cabin top and
then fit it to the cabin walls. Therefore, for final fitting,
we leave the cabin walls bare with no sheer clamps
until the cabin roof has been fitted perfectly so that it
meets the cabin walls on all four wall surfaces. At this
point, we install a cabin wall sheer clamp joining
member around the newly-fitted upper perimeter of the
cabin walls so that we can then install the cabin roof
permanently with proper bonding area.
A molded cabin top only 1⁄2" (12mm) thick, especially
one with compound curves, is rigid. You can easily
mold this type of cabin roof out of multiple layers of
veneer over a simple ribband mold made up before-
hand to the desired shape. You can completely prefinish
the interior surface of this cabin roof molding before
installation.
When designing cabin structures, it is good to keep in
mind the type and amount of hardware that you may
install on the cabin top surface. If major winches are to
be located on the cabin corners, you should design the
whole cabin structure to accommodate this extra load.
Provide adequate blocking in proper places for hardware
installation. Take care to make the blocking look nice
because it is in a place where it will be continually
viewed.
Deck Finishing
Prepare the deck for coating or covering with fabric in
much the same manner as the hull, except that the
overall fairness of the deck is usually not as crucial. The
two most important criteria for the finished deck surface
are attractiveness and safety. A non-skid deck surface
contributes to safe and efficient movement and opera-
tions by crew members.
There are several ways to make non-skid deck surfaces.
Probably the easiest is to purchase one of the commer-
cial non-skid paint systems, which can be applied over
WEST SYSTEM epoxy and/or fabric. The general proce-
dure is to mix a non-skid compound with the base
paint at a prescribed ratio and apply it over the sanded
epoxy surface. Although the idea of mixing non-skid
material directly into epoxy seems appealing, attempts
at doing so are not usually successful. The 100% solid
epoxy tends to cover the non-skid material, minimizing
its effectiveness, and paint applied over the unsanded
epoxy may not adhere well. Sanding the epoxy to
improve paint adhesion further reduces the non-skid’s
potential.
350
Later Production Steps
Figure 27-26 A cabin roof built over a cabin top and tempo-
rary forms inside the cabin. Small, 1⁄2" wide  3⁄4" thick (12mm
 18mm) ribs spaced on 4" (100mm) centers were laminated
over the interior ply and faired smooth. Blocking for a
headsail track was inserted at the edge of the cabin and a 3⁄16"
(5mm) plywood roof was laminated over the assembly.
Figure 27-27 Construction details for cabin sides and tops.
Deck
Beam
Cabin trunk
sides
Cleat or fastening strip
Laminated top
Plywood
cabin top
Beam
Trim
Carling
Beam
Deck
Carling

--- PAGE 365 ---
Some of our customers have found that an alternative
to mixing non-skid material with paint is to pour large
quantities of sand ballast, available at hobby shops for
use in miniature landscaping, over wet epoxy. To do
this, mask off the perimeter of the non-skid area. Coat
the enclosed surface with epoxy and then immediately
cover the epoxy with a 1⁄4" (6mm) layer of sand ballast.
When the epoxy has cured, brush and vacuum away
excess sand and paint the surface, which should be
rough everywhere. Use generous quantities of sand
ballast to make sure that no glossy spots remain between
particles since these may cause problems with paint
adhesion.
You can also use 6 oz or 10 oz (200g/m2 or 340g/m2)
fiberglass cloth to make a somewhat less coarse deck.
Mask off areas that you want to remain smooth and
cover them with plastic. Bond the fabric to the surface,
using techniques described in Chapter 13, but remove
all excess epoxy with a plastic spreader. The weave of
the cloth will provide the “non-skid” traction, so leave it
exposed. When the epoxy has cured, scrub the area
with water and a 3M Scotch Brite™ pad or steel wool
until it is dull all over. Then paint the glass-covered area.
Another approach to a non-skid deck surface is to
purchase the commercially available Treadmaster™
deck covering material. It is easy to bond this to the
WEST SYSTEM epoxy surface using an adhesive mixture
as the bonding agent. You can purchase this decking
additive in a variety of colors and apply it in tasteful
patterns wherever non-skid potential is needed. The
disadvantages of this material are its added expense and
the potential extra weight per square foot that may be
objectionable on a smaller boat. Treadmaster is a
flexible material adding no strength or stiffness to a
deck surface.
Teak Veneer Deck System
You can achieve a very successful deck surface by
laminating a layer of teak over a well-sealed plywood
base. This veneer lamination of teak ends up being
about 1⁄8" to 3⁄16" (3mm to 5mm) thick, which is thick
enough to provide a durable, hard-wearing surface
capable of lasting for many years. The methods that we
have used to apply this teak surface are described in the
following paragraphs.
Prepare the deck plywood surface in the normal fashion
with a minimum of two coats of WEST SYSTEM epoxy
prior to the application of the teak strips. This is done
to provide a good moisture barrier directly underneath
the teak surface. This will protect the deck plywood
surface and supporting framework from any moisture
attack. Wash the cured epoxy surface with water and
sand the epoxy surface lightly in preparation for
bonding the teak strips to the deck surface.
Before starting any bonding operations, determine a
pattern for the layout of the teak strips. Traditionally,
teak decks have always been laid parallel to the
halfbreadth deck line. However, we have also laid some
decks with the planking parallel to the centerline that
have been very attractive and also practical, more effec-
tively contributing to compression load resistance.
There seems to be no limit to the artistic possibilities in
laying out a teak deck. (See Figure 27-28.)
Saw the teak stock slightly thicker than the desired
finished dimension, leaving 1⁄32" to 1⁄16" (.8mm to 1.6mm)
extra to allow for the sanding process. Saw all of the
strips to a given consistent width that most economi-
cally uses the stock you have on hand. Usually, we buy
our teak in 2" (50mm) thick rough-sawn planks, and
are able to get close to 13⁄4" (45mm) finished dimension
from this. We saw up the stock so that the 13⁄4" width of
the teak strips will be edge grained. This minimizes
expansion-contraction potential (very small with teak
anyway) and makes for a more attractive and more
evenly wearing surface than slab-grained strips would
provide. You can do this by squaring your stock
(sawing it into 2"  2" squares) and then turning it to
Chapter 27 – Deck Construction
351
Figure 27-28 The intersection of the teak deck, a mahogany
covering board, and cedar topsides on Golden Dazy. All three
types of wood are no thicker than 5⁄32" (4mm) and laminated
in place with temporary staples. Note the teak toerail with
limber holes.

--- PAGE 366 ---
the best position from which you can saw edge-grained
teak strips. (See Figure 27-29.) It is crucial that the
width dimension of all the sawn strips be exact and that
you cut the ends off each strip exactly square. The
thickness of the teak strips is not as critical, and you
can rough saw these, eliminating dressing with a thick-
ness planer. You will take care of the teak thickness
when sanding the deck later on. The strips should
range from 6' to 12' (1.8m to 3.6m) in length. Strips
any longer than this are difficult to handle when
bonding them to the deck.
Install each teak strip by first coating it and the area on
the deck where it will be applied with unthickened
resin/hardener mixture. Next, make up an adhesive
mixture using a combination of 404 High-Density Filler
and 423 Graphite Powder. Add High-Density Filler to
the consistency of mayonnaise and then mix in graphite
at a rate of 5-10% by volume. This is enough to color
the epoxy the traditional black between the teak strips
and, more importantly, to protect the epoxy from ultra-
violet light. Although we have never had any trouble
with it, some varieties of teak are notoriously hard to
bond. Try some sample joints with the teak you intend
to use before applying it to the deck.
Don’t worry about applying too much epoxy: excess
adhesive between the deck and the strips helps to
guarantee that strips are bonded to the deck with no
voids and very little will be wasted. Leave gaps of about
3⁄32" (2mm) between strips for the traditional look and to
ensure a positive seal between the edges of the
individual planks. If little or no epoxy floods into a gap,
you have an immediate indication of a potential epoxy-
starved area.
Use butt joints where long strips are needed. Saw the
ends of the planks square on a miter box or cutoff saw
so that they will lie flat and coat them liberally with
adhesive. Stagger joints for the most appealing effect.
There are many ways to hold planking down until the
epoxy cures. The objectives are straightforward and any
technique can be used if you keep them in mind. Strips
should be in contact with the epoxy and, to avoid water
damage in the future, there should be no holes in the
deck. We recommend inserting #10 sheet metal screws
and washers, both of which have been coated with a
mold-release agent, into the gaps between planks. The
washers hold the edges of the teak firmly until the
epoxy cures, are easy to remove, and provide 3⁄16"
(5mm) spacing. When the strips are bonded in place,
the deck is usually a mess, with black adhesive smeared
on rough teak and, if you’ve used them, staples sticking
up all over the place. At this point, remove the screws
and washers and fill the holes with the same filled
(High-Density Filler and Graphite Fiber) black epoxy
used to bond the deck boards. Using a syringe will
speed this process. Rough sand the entire deck with 50-
grit paper and a hand-operated belt sander or a rotary
sander with a good foam disc pad and thin plywood or
plastic face. Rotary sanders are designed for this type of
work and do an excellent job.
352
Later Production Steps
Figure 27-30  Use sheet metal screws with large washers to
clamp the strips in position until the epoxy/404/423 Graphite
mixture cures. Fill hole and gaps with epoxy/404/423
Graphite mixture after screws are removed. Sand flush with
teak planks after epoxy cures.
Figure 27-29  Two methods for cutting edge-grained deck
strips from rough-sawn teak planks.
Edge-grained strips
Flat
sawn
stock
#10 Sheet 
metal screw
Fill holes and gap with
epoxy/404/423
Sand flush
1⁄8"–1⁄4" Thick Strips (veneers)
Vertical grain stock

--- PAGE 367 ---
After rough sanding, the teak deck is relatively smooth,
but gaps and voids usually remain between some strips.
Fill these flush with the filled black epoxy mixture so
that none are left anywhere on the surface. Trowel the
epoxy filler evenly into the gaps, removing any excess
on the deck to reduce the sanding required for a final
finish. After the filled surface has cured, do a final
sanding of the teak surface using 80-grit sandpaper.
Usually, a rotary sander with a foam disc pad is adequate
to achieve a nice, smooth surface. Another handy tool
for final teak sanding, especially for getting in tight
Chapter 27 – Deck Construction
353
Figure 27-31  The deck of a 26' (7.9m) Luders 16 framed-in
and ready for plywood covering.
Figure 27-32 The Luders 16 deck covered with 1⁄4" (6mm)
okoume plywood. The teak overlay will contribute to deck
strength and stiffness.
Figure 27-33 Installing teak planking parallel to the sheer,
beginning along the outer sheer line and progressing toward
the center of the boat. This is a sprung deck.
Figure 27-34 Deck planking and final sanding are completed.
Note the herringbone pattern where planks meet along the
centerline. Also note that the teak begins several inches
inboard from the sheer to allow for a painted cover board for
an attractive effect.

--- PAGE 368 ---
areas, is the modified air file sander (as described in
Chapter 8). Inevitably, final sanding will involve some
hand sanding with a block, especially when getting up
around tight areas, such as cabins, hatches, and cockpits.
After you have completed the final sanding, your deck
surface is done. There is nothing more to do but install
the hardware. If you spill any epoxy or paint on the
deck surface, don’t worry. You can remove it easily with
a little sanding.
Comments about the Teak Veneer System
We have had excellent results with teak decks that have
ended up measuring about 1⁄8" to 3⁄16" (3mm to 5mm)
thick. We feel that 1⁄4" (6mm) thick is about maximum
for this type of system, and we advise against using any
thicker strips. The reason is that WEST SYSTEM adhesive
bonding is able to overpower the expansion-contraction
forces which occur in these thinner sections. Teak strips
of much thicker dimension, such as 3⁄8" or 1⁄2" (9mm or
12mm), might create forces so great as to overwhelm
the adhesive, causing it to fail. We see no reason to go
to any teak veneer thicker than 3⁄16". We estimate that it
will take at least 20 years of heavy foot traffic to wear
through this thickness of teak, and should this unlikely
event happen, you can easily replace individual planks
of the teak.
However, some people have had success with thicker
teak using flexible caulk as shown in Figure 27-36.
The teak does not necessarily add any weight to a deck
surface and can be included as a part of the deck scant-
ling system. A deck designed for 1⁄2" plywood might very
well be made up of 3⁄8" plywood and 1⁄8" teak strips at
much the same weight as if 1⁄2" plywood had been used.
Although the teak can gain weight through moisture
absorption, it is a high-density wood and does not gain
weight appreciably as softwoods are prone to do.
Repair and Maintenance
Damage to teak deck surfaces, while not very common,
is easy to repair. Set a router bit to cut the depth of the
teak veneer and rout out the plank or planks to be
removed. Replace with new strips of teak, bonding
exactly as you did the original deck. Sand the new
pieces flush with the rest of the deck surface and the
job is done. It will look as good as new.
There are various treatments on the market for keeping
teak bright. Some of these are excellent if you want to
put the time into this type of upkeep, but they are not
necessary. A lustrous gray, sun-bleached deck can be
very appealing.
354
Later Production Steps
Figure 27-35 Teak planking on Golden Dazy laid parallel to
the centerline. Installation was simplified because strips did
not have to bend to the arc of the sheer line.
Figure 27-36 For planks thicker than 1⁄4", use epoxy to bond
planks to the deck only. Fill the plank gaps with flexible caulk.
Fill screw holes with epoxy
Leave plank gaps unfilled
Fill plank gaps with
flexible caulk
1⁄4"–3⁄4" Thick Strips (planks)

--- PAGE 369 ---
Appendices
Appendix A
Review of Basic Techniques for 
Using WEST SYSTEM® Epoxy
Appendix B
Wood Data
Appendix C
Fatigue Aspects of Epoxies and 
Wood/Epoxy Composites
Appendix D
Scantlings for Well-Known Boats Built with
WEST SYSTEM® Epoxy
Appendix E
Impact Testing on Reinforced Laminates
Appendix F
English to Metric Conversions 
Selected Bibliography
Index

--- PAGE 371 ---
Using WEST SYSTEM epoxy correctly, that is, making 
best use of its handling characteristics and getting the
most out of its physical properties, requires some under-
standing of the chemistry involved in curing epoxy.
Epoxy’s Cure Stages
Mixing epoxy resin and hardener begins a chemical
reaction that transforms the combined liquid ingredients
to a solid. The time it takes for this transformation is
the cure time. As it cures, the epoxy passes from the
liquid state, through a gel state, before it reaches a 
solid state (Figure A-1). 
1. Liquid—Open time 
Open time (also working time or wet lay-up time) 
is the portion of the cure time, after mixing, that 
the resin/hardener mixture remains a liquid and is
workable and suitable for application. All assembly 
and clamping should take place during the open 
time to assure a dependable bond.
2. Gel—Initial cure phase
The mixture passes into an initial cure phase (also called
the green stage) when it begins to gel, or “kick-off.” 
The epoxy is no longer workable and will progress
from a tacky, gel consistency to the firmness of hard
rubber. You will be able to dent it with your thumbnail.
The mixture will become tack free about midway
through the initial cure phase. While it is still tacky
(about like masking tape), a new application of epoxy
will still chemically link with it, so you may still bond
to or recoat the surface without special preparation.
However, this ability diminishes as the mixture
approaches the final cure phase.
3. Solid—Final cure phase
The epoxy mixture has cured to a solid state and can 
be dry sanded. You will no longer be able to dent it
with your thumbnail. At this point the epoxy has
reached most of its ultimate strength, so clamps can 
be removed. A new application of epoxy will no longer
chemically link to it, so the surface of the epoxy must
be properly prepared and sanded before recoating to
achieve a good mechanical, secondary bond. (See
Surface Preparation.)
The mixture will continue to cure for the next several
days to two weeks at room temperature, becoming an
inert plastic solid.
Controlling Cure Time
Open time and overall cure time govern much of the
activity of building and repairing with epoxy. Open
time dictates the time available for mixing, application,
smoothing, shaping, assembly, and clamping. Cure 
time dictates how long you must wait before removing
clamps, or before you can sand or go on to the next
Figure A-1 As it cures, epoxy passes from a liquid state, to a
gel state, to a solid state. Cure time is shorter when the epoxy
is warmer and longer when the epoxy is cooler.
This is a review of the epoxy handling information and basic techniques for WEST SYSTEM epoxy that are
described primarily in Chapters 4, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15. Refer to Chapter 10 for epoxy safety informa-
tion. This review, not included in previous editions, is intended as a helpful reference if a current WEST
SYSTEM User Manual is not available. We recommend that you refer to a current WEST SYSTEM Product
Guide for up-to-date product descriptions and handling characteristics. You may also find current product
information at westsystem.com. The following basic techniques are common to most projects, regardless
of the type of structure or material you are working with.
Review of Basic Techniques for 
Using WEST SYSTEM® Epoxy 
A P P E N D I X
A

--- PAGE 372 ---
358
Appendices
step in the project. Two factors determine an epoxy
mixture’s open time and overall cure time—hardener
cure speed and epoxy temperature.
Hardener speed
Each hardener has an ideal temperature cure range. 
At any given temperature, each resin/hardener combi-
nation will go through the same cure stages, but at
different rates. Select the hardener that gives you
adequate working time for the job you are doing at 
the temperature and conditions you are working 
under. The product descriptions in Chapter 4 and 
the container labels describe hardener pot lives and
cure times. 
Pot life is a term used to compare the cure speeds of
different hardeners. It is the amount of time a specific
mass of mixed resin and hardener remains a liquid 
at a specific temperature—a 100g-mass mixture in a
standard container, at 72°F (22°C). Because pot life is
a measure of the cure speed of a specific contained mass
(volume) of epoxy rather than a thin film, a hardener’s
pot life is much shorter than its open time.
Epoxy temperature
The warmer the temperature of curing epoxy, the faster 
it cures (Figure A-1). The temperature of curing epoxy 
is determined by the ambient temperature plus the
exothermic heat generated by its cure.
Ambient temperature is the temperature of the air or
material in contact with the epoxy. Air temperature is
most often the ambient temperature unless the epoxy 
is applied to a surface with a different temperature.
Generally, epoxy cures faster when the air temperature 
is warmer.
Exothermic heat is produced by the chemical reaction
that cures epoxy. The amount of heat produced
depends on the thickness or exposed surface area of
mixed epoxy. In a thicker mass, more heat is retained,
causing a faster reaction and more heat. The mixing
container’s shape and the mixed quantity have a great
effect on this exothermic reaction. A contained mass of
curing epoxy—8 fl oz (236ml) or more—in a plastic
mixing cup can quickly generate enough heat to melt
the cup and burn your skin. However, if the same
quantity is spread into a thin layer, exothermic heat 
is dissipated, and the epoxy’s cure time is determined
by the ambient temperature. The thinner the layer of
curing epoxy, the less it is affected by exothermic heat,
and the slower it cures.
Adapting to warm and cool temperatures
In warm conditions, gain open time by using a slower
hardener, if possible. Mix smaller batches that can be
used up quickly, or pour the epoxy mixture into a
container with greater surface area (a roller pan, for
example), thereby allowing exothermic heat to dissipate
and extending open time. The sooner the mixture is
transferred or applied (after thorough mixing), the 
more of the mixture’s useful open time will be available
for coating, lay-up, or assembly.
In cool conditions, use a faster hardener, or use supple-
mental heat to raise the epoxy temperature above the
hardener’s minimum recommended application temper-
ature. Use a hot air gun, heat lamp, or other heat source
to warm the resin and hardener before mixing or after
the epoxy is applied. At room temperature, supple-
mental heat is useful when a quicker cure is desired.
NOTE! Unvented kerosene or propane heaters can
inhibit the cure of epoxy and contaminate epoxy
surfaces with unburned hydrocarbons.
CAUTION! Heating epoxy that has not gelled will
lower its viscosity, allowing the epoxy to run or sag
more easily on vertical surfaces. In addition, heating
epoxy applied to a porous substrate (soft wood or low-
density core material) may cause the substrate to “out-
gas” and form bubbles or pinholes in the epoxy coating.
To avoid out-gassing, wait until the epoxy coating has
gelled before warming it. Never heat mixed epoxy in a
liquid state over 120°F (49°C). Regardless of what steps
are taken to control the cure time, thorough planning
of the application and assembly will allow you to make
maximum use of epoxy’s open time and cure time.
Dispensing and Mixing
Careful measuring of epoxy resin and hardener 
and thorough mixing are essential for a proper cure.
Whether the resin/hardener mixture is applied as a
coating or modified with fillers or additives, observing

--- PAGE 373 ---
The Gougeon Brothers On Boat Construction
359
the following procedures will assure a controlled and
thorough chemical transition to a high-strength epoxy
solid.
Dispensing
Dispense the correct proportions of resin and hardener
into a clean plastic, metal, or wax-free paper container.
Don’t use glass or foam containers because of the poten-
tial danger from exothermic heat buildup. DO NOT
attempt to adjust the epoxy cure time by altering the
mix ratio. An accurate ratio is essential for a proper 
cure and full development of physical properties.
Most problems related to curing of the epoxy can be
traced to the wrong ratio of resin and hardener. To
simplify dispensing and reduce the possibility of errors,
we recommend using calibrated WEST SYSTEM Mini
Pumps to meter the correct working ratio of resin 
to hardener. (Figure A-2).
Pump one full pump stroke of resin for each one full
pump stroke of hardener. Depress each pump head
fully and allow the head to come completely back to
the top before beginning the next stroke. Partial strokes
will give the wrong ratio. Read the pump instructions
before using pumps. Before you use the first mixture 
on a project, verify the correct ratio according to the
instructions that come with the pumps. Recheck the
ratio anytime you experience problems with curing.
To dispense without Mini Pumps or other metering
pumps, refer to the hardener container for the proper
resin/hardener ratios for dispensing by weight or
volume.
First-time users—If this is the first time you have used
WEST SYSTEM epoxy, begin with a small test batch to get
the feel for the mixing and curing process before
applying the mixture to your project. This will demon-
strate the hardener’s open time for the temperature you
are working in and assure you that the resin/hardener
ratio 
is metered properly. Mix small batches until you are
confident of the mixture’s handling characteristics.
Mixing
Stir the two ingredients together thoroughly—at least 1
minute—longer in cooler temperatures (Figure A-3). To
assure thorough mixing, scrape the sides and bottom of
the pot as you mix. Use the flat end of the mixing stick
to reach the inside corner of the pot. If you are using a
power mixer, occasionally scrape the sides and corners
of the mixing pot while mixing. If you are going to be
using the mixture for coating, quickly pour it into a
roller pan to extend the open time. 
WARNING! Curing epoxy generates heat. Do not fill
voids or cast layers of epoxy thicker than 1⁄2" (12mm)
—thinner if enclosed by foam or other insulating
material. Several inches of mixed epoxy in a confined
mass (such as a mixing cup) will generate enough heat
to melt a plastic cup, burn your skin, or ignite
combustible materials if left to stand for its full pot 
life. For this reason, do not use foam or glass mixing
containers or pour into confined spaces. If a pot of
mixed epoxy begins to exotherm (heat up), quickly
move it outdoors. Avoid breathing the fumes. Do not
dispose of the mixture until the reaction is complete
and has cooled.
Figure A-2 Dispense the proper proportions of resin and
hardener. With Mini Pumps—pump one full stroke of resin for
every one full stroke of hardener.
Figure A-3 Stir resin and hardener together thoroughly—at
least one minute, longer in cooler temperatures.

--- PAGE 374 ---
360
Appendices
Adding Fillers and Additives
Throughout this book and in other WEST SYSTEM
publications, we refer to epoxy or resin/hardener
mixture, meaning mixed resin and hardener without
fillers or additives added, and thickened mixture or
thickened epoxy, meaning mixed resin and hardener
with fillers added. Fillers are used to thicken epoxy 
for specific applications such as bonding or fairing.
Additives are used to give epoxy additional physical
properties when used as a coating.
Fillers
After selecting an appropriate filler for your job (see
Chapter 4), use it to thicken the epoxy mixture to 
the desired consistency. The thickness of a mixture
required for a particular job is controlled by the amount
of filler added. There is no strict formula or measuring
involved—use your eye to judge what consistency will
work best. Figure A-4 gives you a general guide to the
differences between neat (unthickened) epoxy and the
three consistencies referred to in this book.
Always add fillers in a two-step process:
1. Mix the desired quantity of resin and hardener
thoroughly before adding fillers. Begin with a small
batch—allow room for the filler.
2. Blend in small handfuls or scoops of the appropriate
filler until the desired consistency is reached 
(Figure A-5).
For maximum strength, add only enough filler to
completely bridge gaps between surfaces without
sagging or running out of the joint or gap. A small
amount should squeeze out of joints when clamped.
For thick mixtures, don’t fill the mixing cup more 
than 1⁄3 full of epoxy before adding filler. When 
making fairing compounds, stir in as much 407 or 
410 as you can blend in smoothly—for easy sanding,
the thicker the better. Be sure all of the filler is
thoroughly blended before the mixture is applied.
Spread the mixture into a thinner layer, either 
around the inside of the mixing cup or onto a flat 
non-porous surface or palette, to extend its 
working life. 
Consistency
Unthickened mixture
Slightly thickened
Moderately thickened
Maximum thickness
Syrup
Catsup
Mayonnaise
Peanut Butter
General
Appearance
Characteristics
Drips off vertical
Sags down vertical
Clings to vertical
Clings to vertical
surfaces.
surfaces.
surfaces-peaks
surfaces-peaks
fall over.
stand up.
Uses
Coating, “wetting-out”
Laminating/bonding
General bonding,
Gap filling, filleting,
before bonding, applying
flat panels with
filleting, hardware
fairing, bonding
fiberglass, graphite,
large surface areas, 
bonding.
uneven surfaces.
and other fabrics.
injecting with a syringe.
Figure A-4
Epoxy can be thickened to the ideal consistency needed for a particular job. We refer to four commonly-known
consistencies: syrup, catsup, mayonnaise, and peanut butter.

--- PAGE 375 ---
The Gougeon Brothers On Boat Construction
361
Additives
Although additives are blended with mixed epoxy 
in the same two-step process as fillers, they are not
designed to thicken the epoxy. Refer to the Additive
descriptions in Chapter 4 and follow the mixing
instructions on the individual additive containers.
Surface Preparation
Whether you are bonding, fairing, or applying fabrics,
the success of the application depends not only on the
strength of the epoxy, but also on how well the epoxy
adheres to the surface to which it is being applied.
Unless you are bonding to partially cured epoxy, the
strength of the bond relies on the epoxy’s ability to
mechanically “key” into the surface. That is why the
following three steps of surface preparation are a 
critical part of any secondary bonding operation. 
For good adhesion, bonding surfaces should be 
Clean—Bonding surfaces must be free of any contami-
nants such as grease, oil, wax, or mold release. Clean
contaminated surfaces with lacquer thinner, acetone, 
or other appropriate solvent (Figure A-6). Wipe the
surface with paper towels before the solvent dries.
Clean surfaces before sanding to avoid sanding the
contaminant into the surface. Follow all safety 
precautions when working with solvents.
Dry—All bonding surfaces must be as dry as possible
for good adhesion. If necessary, accelerate drying by
warming the bonding surface with a hot air gun, hair
dryer, or heat lamp (Figure A-7). Use fans to move 
the air in confined or enclosed spaces. Watch for
condensation when working outdoors or whenever 
the temperature of the work environment changes.
Sanded—Sand smooth, non-porous surfaces—
thoroughly abrade the surface (Figure A-8). 80-grit
aluminum oxide paper will provide a good texture 
for the epoxy to “key” into. Be sure the surface to 
be bonded is solid. Remove any flaking, chalking,
blistering, or old coating before sanding. Remove 
all dust after sanding. 
Special preparation for various materials
Cured epoxy—Amine blush can appear as a wax-like
film on cured epoxy surfaces. It is a byproduct of the
curing process and may be more noticeable in cool,
moist conditions. Amine blush can clog sandpaper and
inhibit subsequent bonding, but it is water soluble and
can easily be removed. It’s a good idea to assume it has
formed on any cured epoxy surface.
Figure A-5 Stir in small handfuls of filler until the desired
consistency is reached.
Figure A-6 Clean the surface. Use an appropriate solvent as
necessary to remove contaminants.
Figure A-7 Dry the surface. Allow wet surfaces to dry
thoroughly or use heat or a fan to speed drying.
Figure A-8 Sand non-porous surfaces. Provide a texture for
the epoxy to key into.

--- PAGE 376 ---
362
Appendices
To remove the blush, wash the surface with clean water
(not solvent) and an abrasive pad, such as Scotch-brite™
7447 General Purpose Hand Pads. Dry the surface with
paper towels to remove the dissolved blush before it
dries on the surface. Sand any remaining glossy areas
with 80-grit sandpaper. Wet-sanding will also remove
the amine blush. If a release fabric is applied over the
surface of fresh epoxy, amine blush will be removed
when the release fabric is peeled from the cured epoxy
and no additional sanding is required.
Epoxy surfaces that are still tacky may be bonded to or
coated with epoxy without washing or sanding. Before
applying coatings other than epoxy (paints, bottom
paints, varnishes, gelcoats, etc.), allow epoxy surfaces 
to cure fully, then wash and sand.
Hardwoods—Sand with 80-grit paper.
Teak/oily woods—Wipe with acetone 15 minutes
before coating. Solvent removes the oil at the surface
and allows epoxy to penetrate. Be sure solvent has
evaporated before coating.
Porous woods—No special preparation needed. If
surface is burnished, possibly by dull planer or saw
blades, sand with 80-grit paper to open pores. 
Remove dust.
Steel, lead—Remove contamination, sand or grind 
to bright metal, coat with epoxy, and then (wet) sand
freshly applied epoxy into surface. Re-coat or bond to
the surface after first coat gels.
Aluminum—Remove contamination, sand to a bright
finish, and prepare with 860 Aluminum Etch Kit before
oxidation occurs. Follow kit directions.
Polyester (fiberglass)—Clean contamination with a
silicone and wax remover such as DuPont Prep-Sol™
3919S. Sand with 80-grit paper to a dull finish.
Plastic—Adhesion varies. If a plastic is impervious 
to solvents such as acetone, epoxy generally will not
bond to it. Soft, flexible plastics such as polyethylene,
polypropylene, nylon, and Plexiglas fall into this
category. Hard, rigid plastics such as PVC, ABS,
polycarbonate, and styrene provide better adhesion 
with good surface preparation and adequate bonding
area. After sanding, flame oxidizing (by quickly passing
the flame of a propane torch over the surface without
melting the plastic) can improve bonding in some
plastics. 
It’s a good idea to conduct an adhesion test on any
plastic (or any other material) that you are uncertain
about. 
Bonding (gluing)
This section refers to two types of structural bonding
with epoxy. Two-step bonding is the preferred method
for most situations because it promotes maximum
epoxy penetration into the bonding surface and
prevents resin-starved joints. Single-step bonding can
be used when joints have minimal loads and excess
absorption into porous surfaces is not a problem. In
both cases, epoxy bonds best when it is worked into
the surface with a roller or brush.
Before mixing epoxy, check all parts to be bonded 
for proper fit and surface preparation, gather all the
clamps and tools necessary for the operation, and cover
any areas 
that need protection from spills. 
Two-step bonding
1. Wet out bonding surfaces—Apply an unthickened
resin/hardener mixture to the surfaces to be joined
(Figure A-9). Wet out small or tight areas with a
disposable brush. Wet out larger areas with a foam
roller or by spreading the resin/hardener mixture
evenly over the surface with a plastic spreader. You
may proceed with step two immediately or any time
before the wet-out coat becomes tack free.
Note: Precoating porous surfaces with neat (unthick-
ened) epoxy before applying a thickened epoxy
Figure A-9 Apply unthickened epoxy to the bonding surfaces.

--- PAGE 377 ---
The Gougeon Brothers On Boat Construction
363
adhesive or fairing compound improves adhesion. 
Neat epoxy penetrates and “keys” into surface pores 
and end grain better than thicker epoxy.
2. Apply thickened epoxy to one bonding surface.
Modify the resin/hardener mixture by stirring in the
appropriate filler until it becomes thick enough to
bridge any gaps between the mating surfaces and 
to prevent “resin-starved” joints. Apply enough of 
the mixture to one of the surfaces so that a small
amount will squeeze out when the surfaces are
joined together with a force equivalent to a firm 
hand grip (Figure A-10).
Thickened epoxy can be applied immediately over
the wet-out surface or any time before the wet-out is
no longer tacky. For most small bonding operations,
add the filler to the resin/hardener mixture remaining
in the batch that was used for the wet-out. Mix
enough resin/hardener for both steps. Add the filler
quickly after the surface is wet out and allow for a
shorter working life of the mixture. 
3. Clamp components. Attach clamps as necessary 
to hold the components in place. Use just enough
clamping pressure to squeeze a small amount of the
epoxy mixture from the joint, indicating that the
epoxy is making good contact with both mating
surfaces (Figure A-11). Avoid using too much
clamping pressure, which can squeeze all of the
epoxy mixture out of the joint.
Any method of clamping is suitable as long as there
is no movement between the parts being joined.
Common methods include spring clamps, “C”
clamps and bar clamps, rubber bands, packaging
tape, applying weights, and vacuum bagging. If
necessary, cover clamp pads with tape, or use
polyethylene sheeting or release fabric under the
clamps so they don’t inadvertently bond to the
surface. Staples, nails, or drywall screws are often
used where conventional clamps will not work. In a
corrosive environment, any fasteners left in should be
a non-corroding alloy such as bronze. In some cases,
the thickened epoxy or gravity will hold parts in
position without clamps. Avoid excessive clamping
pressure.
4. Remove or shape excess adhesive that squeezes 
out of the joint as soon as the joint is secured with
clamps. An 804 Mixing Stick is an ideal tool for
removing the excess (Figure A-12). Allow the 
epoxy to cure thoroughly before removing clamps.
Single-step bonding
Single-step bonding is applying the thickened epoxy
directly to both bonding surfaces without first wetting
out the surfaces with neat resin/hardener. We recom-
mend that you thicken the epoxy no more than is
necessary to bridge gaps in the joint (the thinner the
mixture, the more it can penetrate the surface) and that
you do not use this method for highly-loaded joints,
especially when bonding end grain or other porous
surfaces.
Figure A-10 Apply thickened epoxy to one of the bonding
surfaces.
Figure A-11 Clamp components in place before the epoxy gels.
Figure A-12 Remove or shape excess epoxy that squeezes
out of the joint.

--- PAGE 378 ---
364
Appendices
Laminating
The term laminating refers to the process of bonding
numbers of relatively thin layers, like plywood, veneers,
fabrics, or core material to create a composite. A
composite may be any number of layers of the same
material or combinations of different materials.
Methods of epoxy application and clamping will 
differ depending on what you are laminating.
Because of large surface areas and limitations of wet 
lay-up time, roller application is the most common
method for applying epoxy. A faster method for large
surfaces is to simply pour the resin/hardener mixture
onto the middle of the panel and spread the mixture
evenly over the surface with a plastic spreader. Apply
thickened mixtures with an 809 Notched Spreader.
Using staples or screws is the most common method 
of clamping when you laminate a solid material to a
solid substrate. An even distribution of weights will
work when you are laminating a solid material to a 
base that will not hold staples or screws, such as a 
foam or honeycomb core material.
Vacuum bagging is a specialized clamping method for
laminating a wide range of materials. Through the use
of a vacuum pump and plastic sheeting, the atmos-
phere is used to apply perfectly even clamping pressure
over all areas of a panel regardless of the size, shape or
number of layers. (For detailed information on
vacuum bagging, refer to WEST SYSTEM 002-150
Vacuum Bagging Techniques manual.)
Bonding with Fillets
A fillet (fil’it) is a cove-shaped application of thickened
epoxy that bridges an inside corner joint. It is excellent
for bonding parts because it increases the surface area
of the bond and serves as a structural brace. All joints
that will be covered with fiberglass cloth will require a
fillet to support the cloth at the inside corner of the
joint.
The procedure for bonding with fillets is the same as
normal bonding except that instead of removing the
squeezed-out thickened epoxy after the components are
clamped in position, you shape it into a fillet. For larger
fillets, add thickened mixture to the joint as soon as the
bonding operation is complete, before the bonding
mixture becomes tack free, or any time after the final
cure and sanding of exposed epoxy in the fillet area.
1. Bond parts as described previously.
2. Shape and smooth the squeezed-out thick epoxy into
a fillet by drawing a rounded filleting tool (mixing
stick) along the joint, dragging excess material ahead
of the tool and leaving a smooth cove-shaped fillet
bordered on each side by a clean margin. Some
excess filleting material will remain outside of the
margin (Figure A-13). Use the excess material to
refill any voids. Smooth the fillet until you are satis-
fied with its appearance. A mixing stick will leave a
fillet with about a 3⁄8" (9mm) radius. For larger fillets,
an 808 Plastic Spreader, cut to shape or bent to the
desired radius, works well. 
Apply additional thickened epoxy to fill voids or
make larger fillets. Apply the mixture along the joint
line with the rounded mixing stick, using enough
mixture to create the desired size of fillet. For longer
or multiple fillets, empty caulking gun cartridges or
disposable cake decorating bags can be used. Cut the
plastic tip to lay a bead of thickened epoxy large
enough for the desired fillet size. Heavy duty, sealable
Figure A-14 Clean up the excess epoxy outside of the fillet
margin.
Figure A-13 Shape and smooth the fillet with a rounded
filleting tool.

--- PAGE 379 ---
The Gougeon Brothers On Boat Construction
365
food storage bags with one corner cut off may also be
used.
3. Clean up the remaining excess material outside of 
the margin by using a mixing stick or a putty knife
(Figure A-14). Fiberglass cloth or tape may be applied
over the fillet area before the fillet has cured (or after
the fillet is cured and sanded).
4. Sand smooth with 80-grit sandpaper after the fillet
has fully cured. Wipe the surface clean of any dust
and apply several coats of resin/hardener over the
entire fillet area before final finishing.
Bonding Fasteners and Hardware
Installing screws and other threaded fasteners with
WEST SYSTEM epoxy dramatically improves load carrying
capacity by spreading the fastener’s load into a greater
area of the substrate. There are several methods or
levels of hardware bonding depending on the loads 
on the hardware.
Basic fastener bonding
For improved pullout strength and waterproof connec-
tions, the easiest fastener bonding method is to simply
wet out stripped fastener holes and new pilot holes
before installing the screws. Epoxy penetrates the fiber
around the hole, effectively increasing the fastener
diameter. Epoxy also provides a stronger interface with
the fastener threads than wood fiber and keeps out water.
1. Wet out a standard-size pilot hole. Work the mixture
well into the hole with a pipe cleaner or syringe
(Figure A-15). Thicken a second coat of epoxy as
necessary for stripped or oversized holes.
2. Insert the fastener in the hole and allow the epoxy 
to cure.
Advanced fastener bonding
For greater strength and stability, drill oversized holes to
increase the exposed substrate area and the amount of
epoxy around the fastener.
1. Drill oversized holes 2⁄3–3⁄4 the depth of the fastener.
The diameter may be up to twice the fastener
diameter (Figure A-16).
2. Drill a normal sized pilot hole at the bottom of the
oversized hole to the full length of the fastener. The
normal sized pilot hole serves to hold or clamp the
hardware in position until the epoxy cures. If the
fastener/hardware can be clamped by other means,
the oversized hole can be extended to the end of 
the fastener.
3. Wet out the holes and the fastener with epoxy. Allow
the epoxy to thoroughly soak into the exposed end
grain of the wood.
4. Fill the hole with thickened epoxy/adhesive filler. Use
404 High-Density (preferred) or 406 Colloidal Silica.
5. Install the fasteners with just enough force to hold the
hardware in place. Allow the epoxy to cure thoroughly
before applying load to the hardware.
Bonding hardware
Bonding hardware goes a step beyond bonding the
fasteners only. By bonding the hardware base directly to
the surface, you further increase hardware load capacity
and provide a solid bearing surface for the hardware. 
It also seals the wood underneath and is a stronger,
longer lasting attachment than bonding the fasteners
only. It is especially useful to mount hardware on curved,
uneven, or unlevel surfaces.
Figure A-15 Wet out a standard pilot hole and install the
fastener.
Figure A-16 Drill oversized holes to increase the exposed
substrate area and the amount of epoxy around the fastener.

--- PAGE 380 ---
366
Appendices
1. Prepare the mounting surface and the hardware base
for good adhesion (refer to Surface Preparation).
2. Wet out the oversized hole with epoxy. Allow the
epoxy to soak into the exposed end grain of the
wood (as with fastener bonding).
3. Coat the bottom contact surface of the hardware
with unthickened epoxy. Wire brush or sand the 
wet epoxy into the surface with 50-grit sandpaper. 
4. Inject a non-sagging epoxy/404 or 406 mixture into
the hole. Use enough mixture so there are no voids
in the hole after inserting the fastener. Coat the
bottom of the hardware and the fastener threads 
with thickened epoxy (Figure A-17).
5. Place the hardware in position. Insert and tighten
fasteners until a small amount of the mixture
squeezes out of the joint (Figure A-18).
6. Remove excess epoxy or shape into a fillet. Allow the
epoxy to cure at least 24 hours before applying load
to the hardware. Allow more time in cool weather.
Casting a base
Use the thickened epoxy to cast a base under the
hardware when mounting hardware to a curved or
uneven surface, or mounting hardware at an angle 
to the surface.
1. Prepare the fasteners, holes, substrate, and base as
described above. 
2. Bond small blocks to the substrate to support the
base at the desired height and position (e.g., winch
base, Figure A-19a).
3. Apply enough thickened epoxy to cover the blocks.
If the gap between the base and the surface is over
1⁄2" (12mm), fill the gap in two separate layers to
avoid exotherm. 
4. Place the hardware in position, resting on the blocks
(Figure A-19b) and install the fasteners.
5. Smooth the excess epoxy into the desired fillet shape
around the base (Figure A-19c). Allow the epoxy to
cure fully before loading. Protect exposed epoxy
from UV.
Bonding studs
Bond threaded rods or studs into the substrate (instead
of bolts or screws) and attach the hardware with nuts.
This variation is appropriate for many engine, motor, 
or machine installations. Coat the base with wax/mold
release to make the hardware removable. Although the
hardware is not “bonded” to the substrate, the epoxy
still provides a bearing surface that perfectly matches
and supports the base of the hardware.
1. Prepare the studs/threaded rods by waxing the upper
ends (above the surface) and cleaning the lower ends
(below the surface). 
2. Place a nut and washer on the studs, wet out the
lower ends, and push them into the epoxy-filled
holes. Allow the epoxy to cure thoroughly before
attaching hardware and tightening the nuts 
(Figure A-20).
Figure A-18 Tighten fasteners until a small amount of epoxy
squeezes from the joint.
Figure A-17 Coat the hardware bottom and fastener threads
with thickened epoxy.
Figure A-19 Support the base in position with blocking and
fill the void with thickened epoxy.

--- PAGE 381 ---
The Gougeon Brothers On Boat Construction
367
Removing fasteners
If you know that you will want to remove the fastener,
you can coat the threads with wax or mold release
(contaminating the surface enough to prevent a good
bond).
Remove a permanently bonded fastener by applying
heat to the head of the fastener with a soldering iron 
or propane torch. Use a heat shield to protect the
surrounding area. Heat will travel down the fastener,
softening the epoxy in contact with it. At about 250°F
(121°C) the epoxy should soften enough to allow the
fastener to be backed out. Allow more time for heat 
to travel down longer or larger diameter fasteners.
Fairing
Fairing refers to the filling of low areas and the 
shaping and smoothing of a surface to blend with 
the surrounding areas and appear “fair” to the eye 
and touch. After major structural assembly has been
completed, final fairing can be easily accomplished 
with WEST SYSTEM epoxy and low-density fillers.
1. Prepare the surface as you would for bonding (see
Surface Preparation). Sand smooth any bumps or
ridges on the surface and remove all dust from the
area to be faired. 
2. Wet out porous surfaces with unthickened epoxy
(Figure A-21).
3. Mix resin/hardener and 407 Low-Density or 410
Microlight™ filler to a peanut butter consistency. 
The thicker the mixture, the easier it will be to 
sand when cured.
4. Trowel on the thickened epoxy mixture with a plastic
spreader, working it into all voids and depressions.
Smooth the mixture to the desired shape, leaving the
mixture slightly higher than the surrounding area
(Figure A-22). Remove any excess thickened epoxy
before it cures. If the voids you are filling are over 1⁄2"
(12mm) deep, apply the mixture in several applica-
tions or use 206 Slow Hardener or 209 Extra Slow
Hardener, depending on ambient temperature.
NOTE: On vertical and overhead surfaces, allow 
the wet-out coat to gel before applying fairing
compound. The fairing compound may sag or 
slide off the fresh wet-out coat. Apply the fairing
compound while the wet-out is still tacky.
5. Allow the final thickened epoxy application to cure
thoroughly.
6. Sand the fairing material to blend with the
surrounding contour (Figure A-23). Begin with 
50-grit sandpaper if you have a lot of fairing material
to remove. Use 80-grit paper on the appropriate
sanding block when you are close to the final contour. 
CAUTION! Don’t forget your dust mask. Remove the
sanding dust and fill any remaining voids following 
the same procedure.
Figure A-20 Bond threaded rods or studs into the substrate
as an alternative for easily removable hardware.
Figure A-21 Wet out porous surfaces before applying fairing
compound.
Figure A-22 Apply fairing compound to fill all voids, and then
smooth it to the desired shape.

--- PAGE 382 ---
368
Appendices
7. Apply several coats of resin/hardener to the area 
with a disposable brush or roller after you are satis-
fied with the fairness. Allow the final coat to cure
thoroughly before final sanding and finishing.
Applying Woven Cloth and Tape
Fiberglass cloth is applied to surfaces to provide
reinforcement and/or abrasion resistance, or in the 
case of Douglas fir plywood, to prevent grain checking. It
is usually applied after fairing and shaping are
completed, and before the final coating operation. 
It is also applied in multiple layers and in combination
with other materials to build composite parts.
Fiberglass cloth may be applied to surfaces by either of
two methods. The “dry” method refers to applying the
cloth over a dry surface. The “wet” method refers to
applying the cloth to an epoxy-coated surface, often after
the wet-out coat becomes tacky, which helps it cling to
vertical or overhead surfaces. Since this method makes 
it more difficult to position the cloth, the dry method is
the preferred method especially with thinner cloth.
Dry method
1. Prepare the surface as you would for bonding (see
Surface Preparation).
2. Position the cloth over the surface and cut it several
inches larger on all sides. If the surface area you are
covering is larger than the cloth size, allow multiple
pieces to overlap by approximately two inches
(50mm). On sloped or vertical surfaces, hold the cloth
in place with masking or duct tape, or with staples.
3. Mix a small quantity of epoxy (three or four pumps
each of resin and hardener).
4.