o
laminations so that you can shoot a long staple through
the first and second laminations and draw them
together tight with the temporary block.
Checking the Second Layer for Voids
After the epoxy has cured and you have removed the
wide-crown staples, make a thorough check of the
second lamination to detect any voids that may have
developed. To do this, lightly move your hand over the
hull surface and listen for a different sound than is
usual for most of the surface. An area of veneer that is
not well bonded to that beneath it will vibrate at a
different frequency, producing a definite, higher pitched
sound than that produced by veneers which are well
bonded. Mark these suspect areas on the hull.
There are two ways to fill voids. The first, which is
easier if you plan to laminate several more layers, is to
cut out and remove the unbonded veneer. Fill the
resulting gap with a thick mixture of epoxy and equal
parts of high and low-density filler. When this mixture
262
Hull Construction Methods

--- PAGE 277 ---
cures, fair the surface smooth and apply more veneer
over it. The second method to fill voids is to inject
epoxy with a syringe into the immediate area of the
void. If it is large enough, drill several holes at various
points in the void to make sure that you are indeed
filling it solidly with epoxy.
Once you have determined that the second layer is
structurally sound, you will find that the hull surface is
very rigid, creating a solid mold surface over which you
can easily apply succeeding laminations. The only
caution is that you should apply the third layer using
staples that are short enough not to break through the
prefinished interior surface. 
Refer to Chapter 23 for information on fairing and
finishing and how to roll over the hull. 
Chapter 22 – Stringer-Frame Construction
263

--- PAGE 278 ---
264
Hull Construction Methods

--- PAGE 279 ---
In the 25 years since this book was first written, variations of strip plank construction have evolved, and
they open up a wide range of building possibilities. Strip composite construction for small boats such as
“stripper canoes” has also become increasingly popular. This chapter provides an overview of strip plank
methods, but concentrates on strip plank laminating. 
One of the advantages of strip construction is the
ability to build compound shapes quickly. The strips
are typically placed over mold frames that define the
structure’s shape. Most shapes can be built in strip
construction, although the more spherical shapes are
limited by the strip’s ability to bend in two directions.
An Overview of Strip Plank Methods
Strip planking, as it is most commonly known, began
as a method for planking round bottomed boats that
was quicker and easier than carvel planking. It elimi-
nated much of the spiling, steam bending, and caulking
that went with carvel construction. Strip planking
became more widely used when waterproof adhesives
became available. Resorcinol glues were used with edge
nailing of narrow (often square in section) planks over
frames. The nails held the planks as the adhesive dried
and were left in place. They offered some cross-grain
reinforcement along with the frames. Epoxy took strip
planking a step further because it could fill gaps better
than resorcinol and required only contact pressure
during cure. Everything from rowboats to 250-ton
commercial fishing boats have been built using strip
plank construction.
Strip plank laminating or the strip plank veneer method
combines strip planking with cold molding or
laminating. Mold frames are set up and solidly planked,
usually with edge-glued strips of softwood. The set-up
is then covered by layers of veneer, usually applied in a
double diagonal pattern (±45°) to provide cross-grained
reinforcement. The strip planks become the interior
lamination of the finished hull. As more layers are added,
the need for interior frames is reduced or eliminated.
Many boats in the 20' to 35' (6m to 10m) range are
monocoque structures, for which only temporary frames
are needed. When construction is finished, these
temporary frames are removed.
Compared to the mold method of building a laminated
veneer hull, strip construction offers significant advan-
tages. While both methods can be used to build rigid
monocoque structures with frameless interiors, strip
plank laminating requires much less labor. Laminating
veneer over a temporary mold or plug is a more diffi-
cult process, requiring multiple layers of veneer, each of
which must be spiled, bonded, and fixed in place until
the adhesive cures. In addition, the temporary mold
can be as difficult to build as the actual boat. Strip
plank laminating uses fewer veneers, the hull shape can
be quickly established, and only part of the mold
frames are discarded. 
Some of the largest wood/epoxy boats ever built use
strip plank laminating. For example, the 124' (38m)
sloop Antonisa and the 213' (65m) barque Tenacious
were recently built using variations of the strip plank
laminating method. Both use double diagonal layers
over strip planking, with a second strip plank layer on
the exterior. At this scale, however, the diagonal layers
are at least 3⁄8" (9mm) thick and technically not what
you would call veneers. Hulls of this size still rely on
internal frames and bulkheads for cross-grain support.
This building method is recognized by marine classifi-
cation societies like Lloyd’s Register of Shipping,
Registro Italiano Navale (RINA) and Det Norske Veritas
(DNV). It is a preferred and proven method for
building large wood/epoxy vessels.
Because the type and number of layers of material
which can be laminated over the first layer of strip
planking can be infinitely manipulated, this method of
construction has endless variations and may be used to
construct boat components as well as entire hulls. 
Strip Plank Laminated Veneer and 
Strip Composite Construction
C H A P T E R
23

--- PAGE 280 ---
Strip composite construction is another variation of
strip planking. Strips are joined as with the previous
variations, but all cross-grain reinforcing is done with a
layer, or layers, of fabric, bonded with epoxy on the
inside and outside. This results in a stiff, strong, often
frameless, lightweight structure. With single layers of
fabric, the epoxy and fiberglass cure clear, allowing the
wood’s natural beauty to show. Popular examples of
strip composite construction are stripper canoes. They
are usually built of 1⁄4" (6mm) thick cedar strips,
planked over temporary frames, with 4 oz (135g/m2) or
6 oz (200g/m2) woven glass fabric inside and out.
Though used most often for smaller boats, strip
composite construction is not limited to small craft or
to standard boat shapes. Larger custom racing craft may
be constructed this way. For example, the Formula 40
trimaran Adrenalin used unidirectional carbon fiber
reinforcing laid at 90° to the 3⁄8" (9mm) thick cedar
strips. 
There are many variations of reinforcing materials and
many choices of strip composites. When higher density
materials such as mahogany, cedar, and pine are joined,
they contribute to the structure and are considered an
“active core.” They provide tensile and compressive
strength along the grain, as well as shear strength
through their thickness. Such a core may require
minimal reinforcement, depending on grain strength
and how the composite will be used. In contrast, a
lower-density core (such as foam strips) provides shear
strength but does not add longitudinal strength or
significant compressive strength. 
Setting Up for Strip Planking
With strip plank construction, just as with the mold
method, we use 5⁄8" (15mm) particleboard as temporary
mold frames to define the shape of the hull. Set up the
frames as described for the mold method and then
cover them with strip planking. The only difference is
that extra care must be taken to be sure that the bevels
on the frames are correct. Hard spots may dent the
planking as it is bent over the frames, and this damage
can be visible in the interior.
Decide temporary mold frame positioning and spacing
during lofting, taking into account the locations of
stationary bulkheads, framework, and any other
internal items which might interfere with a chosen
temporary frame location. Usually, setting up a perma-
nent bulkhead means that you can eliminate a
temporary frame, but sometimes a bulkhead is situated
between two temporary frames and too large a gap
would be left if either were removed. Therefore, early
on, coordinate the locations of the permanent structural
members which can act as mold frames with the
locations of the temporary mold frames so that you can
provide proper support for the strip planking process
with the least amount of set-up.
Planking thickness and the shape of the hull determine
the standard spacing between mold stations. For 1⁄2"
(12mm) thick planking, a 16" (400mm) span between
stations is about maximum. Frames that will be covered
with 1" (25mm) thick planking might be as far as 30"
(760mm) apart. Average spacing for 5⁄8" to 7⁄8" (15mm to
22mm) planking is 18" to 24" (460mm to 600mm).
With any hull, there may be areas of tight, sharp curves
which cannot be properly defined by the general station
spacing. We usually insert half frames between two
normally positioned frames in these areas. If there aren’t
too many sharp curves, this is much quicker than
decreasing the standard frame spacing throughout the
hull to accommodate one area of sharp curves.
With strip plank construction, the keel, stem, and
transom are always included in the set-up to become
part of the permanent hull. This means that you will
have to make provisions for notching the keel and stem
into the temporary mold frames as well as into
bulkheads and laminated frames which may also be in
the set-up. Hold the keel and stem temporarily in place
to each temporary mold frame by inserting a screw
through a small block that is attached to the side of the
temporary mold frame just underneath the keel or stem
area. The screw holds the keel or stem snug against the
temporary mold frame until the lamination process is
complete. You can then remove these screws easily
when it is time to remove the temporary mold frames.
Permanently position and attach the keel and stem to
bulkheads, frames, or any other permanent interior
items, using epoxy held in place with alloy wood
screws of proper length.
A permanent or temporary sheer clamp must be
included in the set-up so that the planks near the sheer
can attach to it, especially if the planking will run out
266
Hull Construction Methods

--- PAGE 281 ---
or cross the sheer at an angle. Without hand spiling, it’s
very difficult to finish planking with strips running
exactly parallel to the sheer line. We usually install
permanent sheer clamps, although doing this means
that we often have to saw temporary frames in order to
remove them. This is only a problem if we want to use
the frames for another boat.
Precoat and sand exposed interior areas of the perma-
nent sheer clamp, keel, stem, transom, bulkheads, and
other permanent interior items before installing them in
the set-up. Protect all prefinished permanent members
by covering them with duct tape or other heavy-duty
tape, which will prevent damage from both dripping
epoxy and sanding.
When you have installed all of the permanent members
in the set-up and completed final fairing of both tempo-
rary frames and permanent members, the set-up is
ready for strip planking. During this procedure, you
should attach the planking permanently to all perma-
nent members but avoid any possibility of accidentally
bonding the planking to the temporary mold frames.
Cover the edges of all temporary frames carefully with
strips of 4-mil or 6-mil polyethylene sheet, stapling the
plastic several inches back from the edges on both sides
of the frame. When you have completed this, you are
ready to begin strip planking.
Stock for Strip Planking
Choose the most practical planking size for your
project. Most boats will require strip planks between 1⁄2"
and 1" (12mm and 25mm) thick. Determine the
planking size for your hull after considering the
following:
1. The size and width of the boat.
2. The spacing between permanent or temporary frames
in the set-up.
3. Whether the chosen thickness of planking can bend
around the most severe curves in the hull.
4. The most efficient use of available dimensional
lumber.
Planking width is governed by two factors. First is the
need to attach one plank to the next with dowels or
nails in the process of edge nailing. This is somewhat
impractical with anything wider than 11⁄2" (38mm)
strips: the widest we’ve ever used was 11⁄4" (31mm). The
flexibility of the planking in the edgewise direction is
the second factor and is an important consideration for
rapid application of strip planking.
More recently, strips have been machined on the edges
with a matching bead and cove feature. Strips machined
this way act like splines that align planks, eliminating
the need for most dowels and edge nails. If you can
select the base stock from which to saw strips, we
suggest that you choose slab-sawn planks which, when
ripped, will show edge grain on interior and exterior
surfaces. Edge-grain planks are usually more attractive
for naturally finished interiors. There are two better
reasons for using them, however: edge-grain planks are
more stable than other planks, and they sand and
machine more consistently than flat grain. Fairing up
surfaces for final finishing and laminating therefore goes
a bit more quickly.
Dimensional accuracy is important when you are
sawing and milling the stock for planking. Accuracy is
particularly important in the thickness dimension. A
plank that is even 1⁄32" (.8mm) smaller than its neighbors
will create a depression along its entire length that you
will need to fill prior to further laminating. Sawing
enough planking for an entire hull is a large under-
taking. We always take the time to set up a proper
sawing operation by making sure that we have a good
feed ramp for easily moving the stock into the saw and
a good exit ramp for the stock to lie on as it is exiting
from the back of the saw. Whenever possible, we set up
spring tensioning to hold the stock down on the saw
table and up against the saw guide so that we don’t
Chapter 23 – Strip Plank Laminated Veneer and Strip Composite Construction
267
Figure 23-1 Four common strip edge profiles: (1) square
edged (2) bead and cove, (3) tongue and groove and 
(4) ship lap.

--- PAGE 282 ---
have to rely entirely on hand pressure to guide the
stock through the saw blade. For those who can justify
the cost, a stock feeder attachment for your table saw
can efficiently produce accurate strip planks. It not only
holds the plank against the rip fence during the cut but
also propels the plank through the cut, dramatically
reducing the physical effort required for the job.
You probably won’t be able to buy planks long enough
to cover your entire hull. Usually, you have to cut at
least one scarf and perhaps as many as four to make up
a plank to span all of the hull stations. It is much easier
to scarf strips before you apply them. It can be quite
difficult to scarf strip planking in place while bending it
over frames, especially in short, wide boats. Do all
scarfing carefully and accurately, following the instruc-
tions in Chapter 12 so that there will be no dog legs,
kinks at the scarf, or overlaps to increase planking
thickness at the joints.
Spiling and Beveling Strip Planks
The concept of planking a hull is at least several
thousand years old. The traditional carvel-built hull has
planks lying edge-to-edge, and the techniques devel-
oped for carvel planking are well known. Traditionally,
because boats are fatter in the middle and smaller out at
the bow and stern, planking has always been tapered at
its ends to adjust for this change in dimensions.
Because planks are joined one-by-one around a curved
surface, it’s also common to bevel their edges so that
they meet flush where they join. Both the spiling and
beveling operations are very tedious and time-
consuming, and both require a good deal of skill.
With traditional procedures, two workers might be
lucky to apply five or six planks a day on a 40' (12m)
hull. To speed up the planking process and make this
construction method more practical, we have elimi-
nated spiling and beveling. When these two jobs are
unnecessary, two well-organized people can apply up to
25 planks in eight hours and even more if the planks
incorporate edges that self align. These include bead
and cove or tongue and groove edges. Planks with these
features minimize the need for edge nails and dowels
except for the most stubborn areas. 
Instead of spiling, we adjust for dimensional decreases
as planks approach the ends of the hull by allowing
them to run out at the keel and the sheer as they do
when we build a mold. Unless the hull is particularly
fat for its length, this technique presents no difficulties,
provided that the planking is thin enough to bend
easily edgewise as it arcs toward the sheer or keel. With
a thick WEST SYSTEM® epoxy mixture, beveling is usually
unnecessary for structural reasons. Eliminating it saves
a great deal of time. When viewed from the interior, the
planking on most hulls always fits tight and looks the
same, whether it has been beveled or not.
Applying Strip Planking
As might be imagined, locating the first plank on the
set-up is of paramount importance because the location
of this master plank determines the direction and
amount of curve that all succeeding planking will
follow as it approaches either the keel or sheer.
Improper location of this first plank might cause the
planking approaching the sheer to become overly
curved to the point where it would be difficult to bend
the planks in place, while the planking on the other
side of the master plank that is approaching the keel
might hardly curve at all. The goal is to locate the
master plank about midpoint along the hull and in an
arc that will allow the planking installed on either side
of it to bend about the same amount as it approaches
the keel or sheer.
The simplest method of determining the location of the
master plank is to determine mid-frame locations at
various points along the hull. Establish these positions
by measuring along the perimeter of the frames
between the keel and the sheer, starting in the middle
of the hull and working out toward the ends.
Temporarily exclude the first few stations at the bow
and the transom because the shape of the boat is
changing abruptly at these points and will not give you
a true overall reading of what is happening with the
majority of the hull. When you have located a point on
the frame at each station that is equidistant from both
the keel and the sheer, position a batten along these
marks and temporarily nail it in position. Using your
eye as the guide, move the batten wherever needed to
achieve a fair curve that still intersects the mid-frame
marks as closely as possible. You can extend the batten
268
Hull Construction Methods

--- PAGE 283 ---
arc to achieve a fair curve over the unmarked fore and
aft frames.
With this batten installed, you can get a better idea
about how the planking will lie on the rest of the hull.
Measure either up or down from the batten at various
points on all the frames to try to get a sense of what the
planking will look like as it approaches the sheer and/or
keel. As you work out the planking direction, try to
determine which are the most severe curves in the hull
and establish the best angle for negotiating them. Then
compare this with the angle of the master veneer (if
veneer will eventually be applied over the strip
planking). Another factor that might affect placement of
the master plank is the amount of compound curve
toward the sheer compared with the compound curve
toward the keel. The bottoms of boats are usually
compounded more than the topsides, and this may
indicate that the master plank should be curved more
toward the sheer where the planks might be more easily
bent edgewise due to the lack of compound curvature.
When you have lined up the batten and adjusted it to
suit your desire for positioning the master plank, care-
fully mark its position on each station so that you can
install the master plank using these marks as reference.
Although it is normally done, it is not necessary that
the master plank be located right at this marked
midpoint position. You could position the master plank
at any point above or below the midpoint marks that you
established with the batten, but it must run parallel to
and at the same distance from each mark at each station
point so that as the hull is fully planked, the planks in
the area of the original marks will run true to them.
If you decide that the shape of your hull is not well
suited to this type of planking procedure (for example,
if the hull is too fat), you can use the double run
planking system. (See Figure 23-2.) With this method,
you apply the planking parallel with the sheer line up
to a point on the hull where it begins to curve exces-
sively. Then apply the next group of planking parallel
with the keel, joining it with the planking that has been
run parallel with the sheer at a central joining plank.
Joining the two directions of planking as they run out
into each other at some point in the central hull area is
difficult without causing a hard spot. This difficulty is
Chapter 23 – Strip Plank Laminated Veneer and Strip Composite Construction
269
Figure 23-2 Two methods for strip planking hulls.
Figure 23-3 Strip planking a mold.
Figure 23-4 Strip planking a 42' (12.8m) hull. These strips
are being laid from a master plank from the bilge up to the
keel.
Master plank method
Locate the master plank
about midpoint along the 
midship girth
Double run method
Planks are laid out from
the keel to the bilge area
where they are trimmed
off in a fair curve

--- PAGE 284 ---
not insurmountable, but the double run planking
system takes a good deal of extra time in comparison to
the run out method where you have to do little or no
fitting at all.
Applying Epoxy
Assume that you are going to run bottom planking
parallel to the keel and topsides planking parallel to the
sheer in a double run planking system and that you
have accurately marked the set-up to receive the master
plank. Install this plank, using screws that are about
twice as long as the thickness of the planking to hold it
temporarily to the mold frames. We used to use
inexpensive roundhead sheet metal screws with large
washers. These made it possible to apply more pressure
without damage to the wood fiber. Now drywall screws
would be used with washers instead. Chipboard frames
require longer screws than wood frames because
chipboard’s holding power is not as good as that of
wood. In areas where you need extra holding power,
screw or staple and bond a piece of wood to the side of
a chipboard frame and screw the planking into this.
Step drill bits, which can cut a pilot hole in the tempo-
rary frame and a shank-sized hole in the plank in one
operation, save the added step of switching between
two different drills or changing bits.
Use alloy screws and epoxy thickened with high-
density filler to attach planking to all permanent parts
of the boat. These screws will be left in the hull.
Countersink them enough so they won’t interfere with
fairing. You will be using two different types and
perhaps sizes of screws: one to attach planking to
temporary frames and the other to attach it to perma-
nent members. Two drill motors set up with two
different size bits will save time. If you are using
drywall screws for temporary fasteners, you can get by
with a single conventional drill bit because the drywall
screw’s shank is smaller in diameter than the threads.
When you have installed the master plank, set up a
procedure to easily and efficiently apply the rest of the
planking to the frames. Mark the planks with surmarks
that line up with a station in the middle of the hull so
that you can accurately position them without having
to guess if they are centered.
If you are using a softwood such as cedar, use a low-
density filler with epoxy to make a thick syrup. This
combination will exceed the grain strength of most
softwoods. If you are working with high-density woods
with higher grain strength, like mahogany, use a high-
density filler for a stronger epoxy mixture.
Support jigs will hold planking upright for convenient
epoxy application. We make them of 1⁄2" (12mm)
plywood, with slots in the tops just large enough for
the plank to sit in. We nail these to saw horses and 
set up as many as are needed to support the plank.
About 3' (1m) off the floor seems to be a comfortable
working height.
Applying epoxy to the edges of several hundred planks
is a significant part of the work of strip planking a hull.
You need a quick, efficient, and clean method for
mixing and applying the adhesive to plank edges. In
the long run, we’ve found it best to spread the epoxy
mixture with an inch-wide stick. We mix epoxy in a
270
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 23-5  An optional fixture for edge gluing multiple
planks. Adjust the width and depth of the fixture for the plank
width and number of planks you want to coat at one time.
Thickened epoxy fills
the gap between the
top of the strips and
the top of the stand
sides
Protect the
stand with
polyethylene
sheeting

--- PAGE 285 ---
tub, such as the WEST SYSTEM 805 Mixing Pot, making
up only enough at one time to fill one third of the tub’s
volume. We apply it along the edge of the plank with
the stick, applying a controlled amount of epoxy to the
surface. If the epoxy is so thin that it runs easily off the
stick, and perhaps off the edge of the plank, thicken it
with more filler. 
After you have applied the thickened epoxy to one edge
of a plank, wet out the edge of the strip that has already
been installed with a thin coat of unthickened epoxy.
You can do this quickly with a foam roller cut to a good
working width. Use the surmark you made earlier to
line up the center of the new plank and the middle
station. If the hull is very large, it’s difficult for one
person to install a plank without getting messy. Ideally,
two or three people can work together, but if you are
shorthanded, make some adjustable stands to hold the
edges of the plank at the right height while you fasten
its middle to the frames. As fastening progresses out
towards the ends of the hull, move the stands inward
and then remove them.
Think of the plank that is being installed as the glue
plank and the plank that has already been installed as
the permanent plank. Begin by fastening the glue plank
tight against the permanent plank about midway along
the hull. Insert a screw through the glue plank into the
mold frame. Then skip one or two stations, depending
on the size and curvature of the hull, and insert another
screw into a mold frame. Hold the glue plank tight
against the permanent plank so there is the best
possible fit between them as you insert the screw. After
you have fastened it at several mold frames on either
side of the mid-hull frame, the glue plank will be under
reasonable control and you can fasten it easily to each
frame in the set-up. If you have applied sufficient epoxy
to the new plank, some should squeeze out. Most of
this will be on the exterior of the hull because of the
tapered gap between the planks, but some will invari-
ably end up on the interior. Remove excess adhesive
from both surfaces before it cures.
Edge Fastening
It is common to have some misalignment between
planks in the areas between the mold frames. To keep
this misalignment to a minimum, you should allow
each plank to take a natural curve as you bend it
around the hull. You can correct plank misalignment
easily by edge nailing with the use of 1⁄8" (3mm)
diameter wooden dowels. While you could use nails
instead of wooden dowels, dowels are preferable for
several reasons. Because the hull will be laminated over
anyway, the extra cross-grain strength that nails might
provide isn’t needed. (Wooden dowels could also
provide excellent cross-grain strength if they were
bonded in place.) Of the hundreds of nails that might
be used in a hull, a small percentage will inadvertently
break through the sides of a plank. This is a particular
problem on the interior of the hull because the nails are
not only unsightly but will impede sanding and are
difficult to remove. If a wooden dowel happens to run
out in the planking, it is easily sanded smooth and is
not particularly unattractive.
To align the planking between frames, hold the glue
plank and permanent plank between your thumb and
forefinger so that they are in exact alignment. Then drill
a 1⁄8" (3mm) diameter hole through the edge of one
plank into the next, moving down the plank between
each station until you have drilled all of the holes while
holding the planking in perfect alignment. The hole
Chapter 23 – Strip Plank Laminated Veneer and Strip Composite Construction
271
Figure 23-6  Doweling to prevent plank misalignment.
1⁄8" birch dowels
Planks laid
tight on
inside
Planks
Outside faired for
diagonal planking.
Epoxy with low-density fillers used
between planks. This thickened
mixture exceeds the grain strength
of cedar and relieves the need to
bevel and fit strips.
Staggered pattern fore
and aft for  birch dowels.
This “fastening” system is
employed only in areas of
severe bend such as the
bilge. Some well-placed
staples will suffice in most
flat areas.

--- PAGE 286 ---
drilling depth should be 11⁄2 times the planking width.
Depending on the distance between frames, you may
need from one to four dowels to hold the planks in
proper alignment between stations until the adhesive
cures. Drill the hole for the dowel slightly undersize so
that the dowel fits snugly and helps draw the planks
together. If available, a second person can follow down
the planks as the holes are being drilled and insert and
tap in place the 1⁄8" dowels, while at the same time
realigning the planks with his hands to make sure that
the predrilled holes line up.
Occasionally the dowels won’t have sufficient holding
power to hold an errant glue plank snug against the
permanent plank. Besides causing an unsightly gap, this
problem will cause the planking to get out of fair. To
solve this, staple a strip of plywood to the glue plank and
then hold it in proper position to close the gap. Staple
the other end of the plywood strip to the adjacent two
or three planks that you have already positioned.
After installing three or four planks, take the time to
remove any excess adhesive that has oozed out of the
joints from both the exterior and interior surfaces. Use
particular care on the interior to keep this surface as
clean as possible, saving work later on. After the
cleanup operation, check the edge joints to make sure
that the alignment is good and that the planking is
going on in nice, fair curves with no humps or bumps
developing. You will also want to check the edge of the
last plank that you have installed to make sure that no
bumps or unusual curves are developing along the edge
that may cause difficulties when you try to fit the next
plank. If a bump does develop, it is best to fair it out
before installing the next plank.
Difficulty may develop toward the end of the planking
job if the planks begin bending excessively in the width
dimension, making it difficult to secure them in place.
If this problem becomes severe enough, you can rectify
it easily by installing one or two maximum-tapered
planks to reduce the amount of curve in the width
direction. Do this by marking the maximum amount of
taper available in the width dimension, using a heavy
lofting batten to mark an even curve which extends
from the middle of the plank out to a tapered point at
each end.
Although the planking will simply run out at most
areas of the hull and require no fitting, at some point
along the keel, the planking from one side of the hull
will begin to butt into the planking from the other side.
Carefully cut the planking of the side done first to a
straight edge that runs parallel to the centerline of the
keel so that an easily defined plane is available against
which you can fit the planking that runs in from the
other side of the hull.
At this point, the strip planking part of the job is
complete. After fairing, the hull will be ready to receive
the layer(s) of reinforcing fabrics on the outside and
inside of the hull (as discussed later in this chapter) or
ready to receive multiple layers of veneer to complete
the hull.
Veneer Laminations
After you have installed all the planking, begin
preparing it just as you would a mold for veneer
lamination. First check to make sure that you have
removed all temporary screws and properly recessed all
permanent screws. Next, rough trim all of the planks
that might run out at the sheer, the stem, or the
transom so that you have a roughly defined surface on
which to laminate veneers. Rather than trim the
planking flush with these surfaces, allow them to
extend  1"-2" (25-50mm) to provide a little extra area
in which to extend laminating pressure. Later, after you
272
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 23-7 The keel joint of the 42' (12.8m) hull  shown in
Figure 23-4. Note the pattern of screw holes where the planks
are secured to the mold frames.

--- PAGE 287 ---
have completed laminating, you can trim the planking
flush with the desired surface.
Before you sand or fair, carefully check the entire strip
plank surface for voids and crevices in the planking and
in the joints between planks. Fill these voids and holes
in the planking at mold frame intersections where you
have removed temporary screws with a thick mixture of
epoxy and low-density filler. Rough fair the hull and
then begin laminating veneer.
You can laminate veneer to a strip plank hull exactly as
described for laminating veneer over a mold or plug in
Chapter 21. However, with strip planking, you can
install the first and second layers of veneer with alloy or
plastic staples which do not have to be removed.
Leaving the staples in saves time and helps make the
strip plank method a practical construction technique.
Begin the first layer of veneer about midpoint on the
hull, using a thick, low-density adhesive mixture to
bond it to the strip planking. Recess staples so that they
will not be in the way of rough fairing in preparation
for the second lamination. You can use the mechanical
spiling system with this and succeeding layers and
greatly speed up the process. The strip plank hull is an
ideal solid mold for laminating; you will find that you
can laminate all layers of veneer quickly and efficiently,
probably in less time than it took to strip plank the
hull. The quality mold surface also helps the hull surface
remain very fair, with little work required between
layers, up through four or five laminations of veneer.
You can remove the temporary frames from the interior
of the hull at a point during construction when you
have applied enough veneer so that the hull is rigidly
self-supporting. It’s possible to disassemble frames, but
probably faster to saw them out, being careful not to
damage the hull. You may have enough bulkheads and
permanent frames in the set-up to support the hull, but
it’s more likely that you’ll need to prop up the sheer,
bow, and transom with blocking to help distribute its
weight. Do not, of course, cut the legs off permanent
frames at this stage.
Final Finishing
With the temporary frames removed, you can work
simultaneously on the interior and exterior surfaces. It’s
usually easiest to sand interior planking smooth while
the hull is upside down so that dust settles to the floor
rather than to the bottom of the boat. Install good
lighting in the interior, provide ventilation with fans,
and wear a dust mask or respirator. If you have not
done so already, cover all prefinished items with tape to
protect them from damage from dripping epoxy and
during sanding.
We use a polisher/sander with 80-grit paper on a soft
foam pad to rough sand and fair interior planking.
When the surface is generally smooth and fair, we finish
sand with orbital sanders and 100-grit paper until the
surface is smooth enough to receive an initial coat of
WEST SYSTEM epoxy.
Although it is not absolutely necessary, you may
prefinish the entire interior while the hull is still upside
Chapter 23 – Strip Plank Laminated Veneer and Strip Composite Construction
273
Figure 23-9 Laminating a second layer of veneer onto a strip
planked hull.
Figure 23-8 Laminating the first layer of veneer over faired
planking. Note the planking bench to the right.

--- PAGE 288 ---
down. It’s our experience that all sanding and coating
operations are much easier with the hull in this
position than when it’s upright. A good portion of the
interior can be easily installed in an upside-down hull,
as will be explained in more detail in Chapter 26. Just
as with mold method hulls, it is more efficient to do a
lot of exterior final finishing, including all fiberglassing,
coating, and sanding, before turning the boat over.
Rolling the Hull
Build a cradle, as described in Chapter 21, in prepara-
tion for rolling. Unlike a molded hull, which you must
lift up and off the mold and then turn over, a strip
plank hull is simply pushed over, using mattresses and
tires covered with carpet to absorb the load. Begin
rolling by lifting one sheer upward, blocking the hull as
you go. When you have raised the sheer to about a 60°
angle, attach lines to it, some going in the direction in
which the hull will be rolled and some leading in the
opposite direction so that people holding them on both
sides of the hull can control it. Unless the boat is
unusually large, a few people can pull it over, while
others hanging onto the ropes on the opposite side
snub their lines around a post or heavy machinery to
slow the rate of fall until the hull sits gently on its
bottom. Set the cradle under the hull and level it
according to the waterlines so that you can complete
the interior and install the deck.
Strip Composite Construction
Until the late 1980s, the use of strip composite
construction had been limited to stripper canoes,
rowing shells, prams, and dinghies. More recently, it
has been used to build boats up to 50' (15m).
Strip composite construction has some very attractive
features. It is one of the fastest ways to build one-off
hulls. It produces a strong hull that can weigh less than
a laminated veneer hull (due to fewer glue lines). The
only disposables are the plywood or particle board
panels left over from the temporary mold stations.
Veneer spiling and fitting are unnecessary, and only
mold frames are used, so the method is very quick. 
You can use lumber from your local dealer rather than
veneers, which can be hard to find. The technique
works well on compounded hulls and results in 
very strong and stiff craft with little or no interior
framework.
The popularity of this method has fueled the develop-
ment of manufactured planking products. Speed
Strip™ Planking System is a tongue and groove style
planking made to order with the wood species of your
choice. If you decide to make your own planking,
cutters are available for machining the edges of
274
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 23-10 The 42' hull with the temporary mold removed.
The hull is supported by permanent bulkheads installed
during set-up. Note the clean interior in which work can
progress while exterior finishing is completed.
Figure 23-11 Launching the 42' yacht. The natural finish
highlights the final layer of veneer laid fore and aft.

--- PAGE 289 ---
planking with a bead and cove feature, which assists in
planking installation and alignment.
In the 1980s, we did some tests to evaluate the relative
effects of various weights and numbers of layers of glass
cloth, and to explore the relationships between these
and wood core thickness in terms of stiffness, ultimate
strength, and weight. More comprehensive tests were
conducted in 1998. Our results provide preliminary
suggestions on the best ways to build strength and stiff-
ness into stripper hulls.
Glass fabric is used in strip composite construction to
supply cross-grain strength to wood planking. In more
traditional methods, closely spaced ribs serve this
function. While two layers of cloth over 1⁄4" (6mm)
planking are sufficient to support a canoe, this schedule
is inadequate for larger hulls. Two approaches to
increasing strength and stiffness are adding extra layers
of cloth and increasing planking thickness. Our testing
indicates that, up to a certain point, adding more fiber-
glass to a hull justifies itself by increasing strength and
stiffness disproportionately to the increase in weight.
Figure 23-13 shows data that compares four thicknesses
of cedar strip panels reinforced with various layers and
weights of woven fiberglass fabric. Data on three thick-
nesses of marine plywood are provided for comparison.
This chart is intended to rank the various panel and
Chapter 23 – Strip Plank Laminated Veneer and Strip Composite Construction
275
Figure 23-13 Stiffness and strength of panels reinforced with
various fiberglass fabrics vs. panel weight. Stiffness is shown
as Inches of deflection and strength is shown as Pounds to
failure.
Figure 23-12  Two stripper canoes built by Herschel Payne. Western red cedar and WEST SYSTEM epoxy were used for both boats.
The 15' (4.5m) model weights 32 lb (12.8kg) and the 18' (5.5m) model weighs 48 lb (21.6kg) .
Panel thickness
cedar strip
Fiberglass
schedule
Weight
ounces/sq. ft.
Inches of
deflection
Pounds to 
failure
3/16"
1 layer 4 oz
6.5
.85
162
3/16"
2 layer 4 oz
8.8
.82
309
3/16"
1 layer 6 oz
8.0
.73
214
3/16"
2 layer 6 oz
10.6
.90
500
1/4"
1 layer 4 oz
9.0
.45
150
1/4"
2 layer 4 oz
10.3
.70
375
1/4"
1 layer 6 oz
9.8
.49
221
1/4"
2 layer 6 oz
12.3
.58
450
5/16"
1 layer 4 oz
10.6
.43
188
5/16"
2 layer 4 oz
12.6
.66
499
5/16"
1 layer 6 oz
11.6
.48
300
5/16"
2 layer 6 oz
14.1
.44
500
3/8"
1 layer 4 oz
12.7
.42
250
3/8"
2 layer 4 oz
14.1
.66
675
3/8"
1 layer 6 oz
13.1
.32
298
3/8"
2 layer 6 oz
15.4
.51
823
marine plywood
5/32”
1 layer 4 oz
8.5
1.47
211
7/32”
1 layer 4 oz
10.9
1.01
325
1/4”
1 layer 4 oz
12.8
.79
429
5/32”
no glass
6.9
1.60
45
7/32”
no glass
9.1
1.20
149
1/4”
no glass
10.7
.63
225

--- PAGE 290 ---
glass combinations and may be used only as a guide to
help estimate strip plank scantlings for small boats. The
12"  12" (304mm  304mm) cedar strip panels used
in this test were covered with one or two layers of 4 oz
(135g/m2) or 6 oz (200g/m2) fiberglass cloth on each
side. Test panels were subjected to a three-point
bending load using our MTS machine. Loads were
applied parallel to the grain on the cedar panels and
parallel to the face grain on the plywood panels.
Other testing has demonstrated that the impact resist-
ance of a composite can be substantially increased by
balancing panels with layers of fiberglass or aramid
cloth on both interior and exterior surfaces (see
Appendix E).
Strip plank construction has evolved over the years.
Designers now use thicker strip planking and reinforce
the wood strips inside and out with unidirectional fiber
laid perpendicular to the planking direction. (This is
the approach we took in building the main hull of
Adrenalin, which was built with 3⁄8" (9mm) thick Western
red cedar core and unidirectional carbon fiber sheathing
inside and out.) Biaxial fabrics are typically specified
where torsional loads are anticipated in the structure.
Building a Stripper Canoe
Excellent detailed instructions for building stripper
canoes with WEST SYSTEM epoxy have been published
and are included in the Bibliography at the end of the
276
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 23-14  Planking being installed on a mold for the hull
of the Formula 40 trimaran Adrenalin. The hull was built in left
and right female molds rather than the typical male hull and
deck molds.
Figure 23-15 Fairing the inside of the right half of Adrenalin’s
hull after the cedar planking is installed.
Figure 23-16  Applying unidirectional carbon fiber to the
inside of the right half of Adrenalin’s hull. The two halves
were joined after the interior was finished and a bulkhead was
installed.

--- PAGE 291 ---
book. If you have any problems finding a book on the
subject, please call us for sources. The following brief
outline presents one of the many variations on the
technique.
Setting up for a stripper canoe is not much different
from setting up for a strip plank hull. You can use a
standard four-sided strongback, but a three-sided, 
U-shaped foundation made of two 2"  4"s (38mm 
89mm) and one 2"  6" (38mm  140mm) is strong
enough for a 17' (5m) canoe. Set up mold frames and
stems to define the hull shape and bolt them to the
strongback. Fair the set-up and then tape the edges of
the frames or cover them with plastic strips so that they
will not be bonded to the hull.
Many strippers are planked with Western red cedar 
and sheathed, inside and out, with 4 oz (135g/m2) or
6oz (200g/m2) fiberglass cloth. One of the most efficient
ways to prepare stock for planking is to buy nominally
3⁄4" thick flat grain boards, rip them to 1⁄4"  3⁄4" 
(6mm  18mm) edge grain strips, and then scarf 
them to length. 
Canoe designs vary, but it is fairly safe to say that less
than 50% of the planks will need to be full length.
However, additional full-length planks will allow you to
be selective in choosing planks for contrasting grain and
color.
Prior to beginning, you need to decide on a plank
layout scheme, as shown in Figure 23-2. Most canoes
are built using the master plank method, but some
designs are better suited for the double run method.
Each method has advantages and disadvantages with
the double run method requiring fewer fitted joints. 
Edge glue the planks with a thickened low-density
epoxy mixture and use staples for temporary pressure
until the epoxy cures. Wire brads or finish nails can be
used at the stations. The flat bottom section of a canoe
resembles a football.
Remove staples and nails when the epoxy has cured.
Fair the canoe, first with a block plane and then with
an 11" (280mm) long sanding block. When you are
satisfied, clean the surface with a vacuum cleaner and
wipe the hull down sparingly with warm water and a
sponge. This causes the damaged wood fibers at the
staples and nails to swell and “heal” the holes to a
surprising degree. Allow 24 hours drying under good
dry conditions before applying an initial coating of
WEST SYSTEM epoxy. We recommend using the 207
Special Coating Hardener on strip canoes as it is formu-
lated for maximum long-term clarity. Allow this initial
coat to cure, lightly sand and clean the surface again,
and apply 4 oz (135 g/m2) or 6 oz (200 g/m2) woven
fiberglass cloth.
Use the dry method to apply the cloth. (See Chapter 13.)
Fit and cut the cloth and place it over the entire hull
exterior. Then follow the special instructions for fiber-
glass application for clear finishing presented in
Chapter 13. Use a stiff bristled brush to spread the
epoxy. Use minimal strokes and allow the epoxy to sink
into the fabric. Draw off excess epoxy with a plastic or
rubber spreader. The glass at this point should be clear
but slightly dull.
If you want a second layer of fiberglass, you can apply it
one of two ways. You can either let the first fiberglass
layer cure before continuing or apply the second layer
while the initial glass/epoxy layer is uncured. If you let
it cure, prepare the surface with a water wash and light
sanding. Use the same fiberglass wet-out technique on
this second layer. If you plan to continue glassing with
the second layer while the first layer is uncured, it helps
to have an assistant to help you carefully place the
fiberglass. It will be difficult to work out wrinkles so
accurate initial placement is important. Ideally, you
should apply additional coats of epoxy to fill the weave
Chapter 23 – Strip Plank Laminated Veneer and Strip Composite Construction
277
Figure 23-17 A typical canoe mold with plywood frames.
Typical canoe mold
Align and plumb
frame centerlines
Stem to become
part of hull
Strongback
Plywood or particle
board mold frames
Evenly spaced
mold stations

--- PAGE 292 ---
the same day. This may take two to three coats of epoxy
to accomplish. The fill coats can be applied as soon as
the previous coat of epoxy has cured to a firm tacky
state. This level of cure can take from one to four hours
depending on the temperature in your shop. After the
epoxy has cured, sand initially with 80-grit paper and
then with 120-grit paper until the surface is smooth
and dull. If you’ve sanded into the fiberglass weave,
apply additional coats of epoxy to seal these areas
before sanding again.
At this point, build a cradle. Unbolt the mold frames
and turn them sideways to free the canoe. Turn the
boat over and place it in its cradle. Sand the interior
with a disc sander and soft foam pad as well as with a
block where necessary. The flexible sanding block
shown in Figure 23-18 works well. 
Apply fiberglass on the inside exactly as you did the
outside, with one overall layer and a second layer in the
flat bottom section. Ideally the inside of the canoe
should be glassed as soon as practical so that the
moisture content of the planking does not have time to
change. Increasing moisture content will lead to oil-
canning (loss of hull shape due to swelling wood
fibers). A 4%-6% change in moisture content on a thin
planked hull glassed on one side only could be disas-
trous. 
Lay out the sheer clamp and trim it to shape. Laminate
gunwales and breasthooks. Double check the width of
the hull and install thwarts. These are usually hung
from screws, which fasten up into the gunwales. Build
or buy seats to your liking, install them, and finish the
canoe as you would a strip plank hull.
Strip Composite Components
Strip composite construction methods can be used to
build many boat parts. One of the more interesting
applications is in building spars up to about 30' (9m)
long. The same technique may be used to build cabin
tops and other panels and components where design
considerations favor low weight and minimal interior
framing, or where heavy compound curvature
precludes the use of plywood.
In the past, solid masts were built by shaping a rectan-
gular piece of wood into an airfoil and then, if weight
was a problem, hollowing out the center. We suggest
that instead of building spars this way, you begin with a
male form which describes the shape of one half of the
mast, strip plank it, sheath it with glass, make a second
half, and then bond the two together. The resulting
spar is lightweight and can be designed to receive
specific loads. Because this type of construction has not
been widely used, we cannot recommend strip dimen-
sions and fiberglass schedules. Smaller spars will
probably require both high-density wood strips and
softwood. It is possible to taper the wall thickness and
section of a freestanding mast, but as with all other
aspects of strip composite spars, careful study must be
made to correctly address anticipated loading. 
278
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 23-18 Custom sanding blocks can be made by
bonding flexible belting material to a wood or foam core. 
Vary the core thickness and the saw cut spacing to adjust 
the flexibility for various curved surfaces.
Saw cut through
one belt & core only
Foam core
Conveyor belting
or vinyl skins

--- PAGE 293 ---
A strip composite mast is built in two halves, which are
later joined. Set up a mold much as you would for a
stripper canoe, except that it will only define half the
spar. We suggest using 1⁄2" (12mm) plywood for the
formers and placing them about 1' (300mm) apart along
a strongback as in Figure 23-19. Prepare desired stock
for strip planking as described earlier in this chapter.
There are several ways to plank a strip spar. You can lay
strips over your frames, spot bonding as you go, and
then, when they are all in place, fill all the gaps with an
epoxy/high-density filler mixture in one operation. One
builder reported that he was able to hold the strips in
position with tape until he was ready to bond them. If
you are reluctant to try one of these approaches, edge
glue and staple the planking as you would on a stripper
canoe.
When the epoxy between the strips has cured, remove
the first mast half from the mold and apply fiberglass
cloth to its inside. Make a second strip half, apply fiber-
glass cloth inside, and then bond the two together. Fair
the exterior surface and cover it with fiberglass cloth.
Chapter 23 – Strip Plank Laminated Veneer and Strip Composite Construction
279
Figure 23-19  Building a strip composite spar.
Figure 23-20  A section of a strip composite spar showing 
an “I-beam” shear web. Note bead and cove joints between
planks.
1⁄4" x 3⁄4" Spruce Strips
1⁄4" x 3⁄4" Birch Strip
1⁄2" Plywood Formers
2" x 4"
Strongback

--- PAGE 294 ---
280
Hull Construction Methods

--- PAGE 295 ---
A simple and inexpensive method of hull construction is bonding plywood skins to frames, a wood chine,
and the keel. However, plywood does not bend into compound shapes easily so only sections of cylinders
or cones can be readily generated. These surfaces are known as developed surfaces and can be made
with flat sheets of material like plywood or metal. Developed surfaces limit the shape of a hull, giving it a
somewhat slab-sided look. However, the speed with which you can build a hull with plywood may be
enough of a trade-off to overcome the aesthetic issues.
Composite chine construction, also known as stitch-and-glue construction, is now very popular and is
discussed here and more thoroughly in Chapter 25 Compounded Plywood Construction. A composite
chine or keel is fabricated with a thickened epoxy fillet and fiberglass cloth—no wood structural members
are used. Using the stitch-and-glue method, you can build a complete hull quickly, without the need for
mold stations or a strongback. With this method, it is easy to build a multiple chine boat that has far more
sophistication than single chine forms (see Skene’s Elements of Yacht Design for more information about
multiple chine-developed surfaces). Composite chine construction also leaves the interior of the boat with
very few crannies to collect water and dirt.
This chapter discusses building, installing, and fairing
wood chines as well as scarfing plywood panels in
place as the hull is built.
Hulls with round sections can be laminated with veneer
or strips of plywood. Over the years, however, we have
also used WEST SYSTEM® epoxy with sheet plywood to
produce hard chine hulls. Many hull shapes are well
suited to sheet ply construction. Since plywood is
already laminated, great savings in labor and possibly 
in materials result when it can be used in sheet form 
to build a hull.
The introduction of low-cost plywood panels has been
one of the most significant developments in wooden
boat construction. Shortly after World War II, sheet
plywood began to be widely used in all types and sizes
of custom-built and mass-produced boats. It was
immediately accepted because of its high strength and
stiffness-to-weight ratios, its dimensional stability, its
multidirectional strength, and its convenient 4'  8'
(1200mm  2400mm) size from which parts could be
easily cut. The high pressure and good adhesives used
in manufacturing plywood produce a high quality
laminate.
Without question, the use of plywood has contributed
to quality boat construction. The material is not,
however, perfect. Plywood boats have had serious
maintenance problems and, in many cases, short life
spans. These deficiencies have been so severe that some
boats specifically designed for plywood construction—
the very popular Sunfish™ and Sailfish™ sailboats are
good examples—are now built with fiberglass, which is
often heavier. Fiberglass was substituted for plywood
not because it has superior physical properties, but
because it is relatively easy to maintain. We solve many
of these maintenance and longevity problems by using
WEST SYSTEM epoxy in sheet ply construction.
Our hard chine construction methods differ from
standard techniques most significantly in that we use
epoxy to join all hull pieces and parts, while more
traditional builders use screws, nails, and mechanical
fasteners. In the past, resorcinol or urea-type adhesives
were commonly used with fasteners, but no one
expected the adhesive alone to provide necessary joint
strength. Total bonding, in which 100% of each and
every joint is made with a mixture of epoxy and filler, is
now not only structurally possible, but often the easiest
and least expensive way to join plywood panels.
Our methods also depart from typical plywood hard
chine construction in their emphasis on coating and
sealing. We coat all plywood with epoxy both during
Hard Chine Plywood Construction
C H A P T E R
24

--- PAGE 296 ---
and after construction, encapsulating the wood to stabi-
lize its moisture content and to protect it from the
harmful effects of moisture. We can produce very light,
stiff, strong, and long-lived hulls by using the bonding
and sealing qualities of WEST SYSTEM epoxy in combina-
tion with good plywood and lumber.
Best of all, sheet plywood is probably the easiest and
fastest material to work with when building a hard chine
hull. There are a number of reasons for this. For instance,
the lofting of a hard chine boat is greatly simplified
because most of its surface area is in a one-dimensional
plane. When lofting a hull that has compound curva-
ture, you must define all points on its surface; with a
hard chine hull, you only need to define the location of
the chine, keel, and sheer points on the lofting board.
This simplifies and greatly speeds up the lofting process
and enables you to develop a body plan in a fraction of
the time normally required for a typical rounded-hull
shape. In addition, the time needed to mark, cut, and
assemble mold frames or permanent frames is greatly
reduced because the process is much easier.
Frame Assembly
In other boatbuilding methods, mold frames are removed
when the hull is finished. In hard chine construction,
however, most frames stay permanently in the boat
because the flat planes of plywood hulls usually require
the support of substantial framework for adequate stiff-
ness. Although frames can be made of plywood, the
straight sections of hard chine hulls often make straight
stock a better choice structurally and economically.
Usually, we decide early in the project on a standard
size of frame material—1"  3" (19mm  63mm)
stock is typical. Two main factors that determine the
size of the frame material are the weight and size of the
boat, and the dimensions of the stringers and chines
that will be notched into the frames. A notched frame
must retain adequate load-bearing capacity. For example,
if you are going to set 11⁄2"  3⁄4" (36mm  18mm)
stringers on edge into 3"  3⁄4" (75mm  18mm) frames,
you can only count on 11⁄2" of the frame material to be
load-bearing until the outer skin is applied. You will
have to decide whether the 11⁄2" of unnotched frame
stock is adequate for your particular situation.
After you have decided on a standard dimension for the
frame material, prepare enough of the desired stock to
make all of the frames in the boat. In many cases, you
can save time by rounding over (or “radiusing”) what
will be the interior edge and then sanding and
precoating all of the frame stock before it is sawn and
assembled into frames. In some cases, however, it may
be easier to perform these finishing operations after you
have assembled the frames.
All the frame joints which will meet either at a chine or
keel must be at least as strong as the timber stock that
is being joined. A joint system that we have used with
great success consists simply of butt fitting the two
pieces of timber together and then covering each side of
the frame with a gusset of plywood. Orient the grain of
the gusset so that each ply crosses the joint at a 45°
angle, thus giving maximum strength. For accuracy, this
assembly is best done in a two-step operation. First, cut
the frame stock to proper size and take care to fit the
individual pieces of the frame together, using nicely
fitted butt joints as the only contact between the
individual pieces.
To ensure accuracy, temporarily position the pieces on a
developed full size body plan from the lofting floor or a
full size frame pattern that has been transferred to
either paper or Mylar™. Use the full size lines as guides
to lay out the frames. When you have fitted all of the
individual joints to your satisfaction, insert wax paper
or a thin polyethylene sheet under the edges to be
joined to prevent any bonding with the surface on
which the fitted frame stock is resting. Coat the butting
edges of the frame pieces with adhesive and reassemble
them on the body plan surface. Hold the frame pieces
in perfect position using small nails (around the
perimeter) or weights until the adhesive cures.
282
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 24-1 Typical frame assembly showing gussets, filler
blocking, and the position of structural members.
Sheer clamps or battens
Side
frames
Blocking for gusset,
if necessary
Stringers
Plywood gussets
on both sides of
the frame
Frame
joint at
chine
Bottom
frames
Keel
Limber holes

--- PAGE 297 ---
Next, install plywood gussets at each joint on one
surface only. The size and thickness of the gusset
material are usually in proportion to the size and thick-
ness of the timber stock used for the frames. Typically,
we use 1⁄4" to 3⁄8" (6mm to 9mm) thick plywood gussets
on 3⁄4" (18mm) thick frame material. At the present time
there are no scantling rules worked out on this relation-
ship, but if you are in doubt, make a sample frame joint
and try to break it. If a break occurs in the joint, make
the gusset bigger.
Because we use gussets of a few standard radii, we can
round and sand their edges and precoat them before
installation on the frames. It’s not necessary to make
them as circles, but as much standardization of gusset
size and shape as possible saves a great deal of time and
labor. Study the lofting of your frames to determine the
best gusset shape for your boat.
Use a high-density adhesive mixture to bond the gussets
and use either clamps or staples for temporary pressure.
Clamps are simpler to use, so choose them wherever
possible. If you are stapling, use either narrow-crown
alloy staples or wide-crown staples. The former can be
left in the hull, but the latter should be removed when
the epoxy has cured. Be sure that any staples left in
place are clear of areas that will be notched or beveled.
After applying the gussets to one side at each joint,
install a spall for additional support in the upper half of
the frame following instructions in Chapter 17. Use
temporary diagonal bracing if you are working with a
particularly large or unwieldy frame. This will help
maintain accuracy when you turn the assembly over to
attach gussets to the other side.
When you have installed gussets on both sides, reposition
the frame on the body plan and check it for accuracy.
Mark the centerline, appropriate waterlines, and sheer
measurements just as you would in the typical frame
assembly procedure discussed in Chapter 17. It’s
convenient to lay out, cut, and finish limber holes in
the frames with epoxy at this point.
Prefinish the frames as much as possible before
installing them in the set-up. You may want to do this
before marking the centerline, waterlines, and sheer for
the set-up. If you have already prefinished frame and
gusset stock, touch it up to make sure that all surfaces
are coated.
Setting Up
The process of setting up hard chine frames is identical
to the standard procedure explained in Chapter 18. In
practice, hard chine frames are easier to work with than
regular frames because the chines serve as reference
points for checking for minor errors in frame location.
In some cases, the frames between the chine and keel
will be straight, but in areas where the hull twists or
flares out abruptly, such as the forward sections of a
power boat, frames are designed to curve and accept
the developed shape of the plywood.1
It’s also considerably easier to fair hard chine frames
than it is to fair frames for hulls with round bilges. In
the initial stages of fairing, only the keel, chine, and
sheer areas are important. Lay a batten halfway between
the chine and keel or the chine and sheer and make
necessary corrections on the frames. Move the batten in
either direction to check the bevel of the frames. Lay
another batten on them from chine to keel and chine to
sheer to check for irregular curves.
When the set-up is complete and the frames are finally
faired, install the stem, keel, and transom as described
in Chapter 19. Sheet plywood construction is similar to
the stringer-frame method in that it uses frames and
stringers to support a thinner skin, but there are two
major differences between the techniques. With sheet
plywood, stringers are not always needed for support
during building. Very little loading develops on any one
stringer when plywood is applied over a hull surface, so
generally there is little cause for concern about deforming
stringers. Stringer size can therefore be based on the
structural needs of the hull skin rather than on mold
requirements.
Chapter 24 – Hard Chine Plywood Construction
283
1In cases like these, the hull is formed as a series of cones and/or cylinders. The
plywood is still straight along certain elements, but these elements may no longer be
parallel to the frames. The design of developed skin plywood hulls can be complex.
For further information, we recommend Modern Boatbuilding by Edwin Monk or
Skene’s Elements of Yacht Design by Francis S. Kinney.

--- PAGE 298 ---
The second difference is in the use of chine logs, longi-
tudinal members which act as stringers for structural
support at the chine joint and are critical for joining
panels. In hard chine plywood construction, chine logs
provide enough bonding area for holding the panels
together and protect potentially vulnerable areas of the
hull. Chine logs should produce joints that are poten-
tially stronger than the plywood.
As Figure 24-4 indicates, there are many successful
ways to make chine joints. The sharp edges which
usually result from these techniques do however
obstruct hydrodynamic flow, and this is a major disad-
vantage of hard chine construction. Rounding sharp
edges minimizes the problem, but requires innovative
joining techniques which can provide large radii
without compromising joint strength.
Some designs, such as the International Fireball dinghy,
have two chines, each with flatter angles, on either side
of the hull. These tend to expose a large amount of end
grain on the overlapping plywood. The usual procedure
was to avoid exposing end grain on the bottom of the
boat, so the bottoms were put on last and the end grain
exposed only on side surfaces. End grain well encapsu-
lated in WEST SYSTEM epoxy has proven very tough and
resistant to abrasion. Chines in this type of hull do,
however, receive more abuse than any other parts of the
hull, and it may be worth adding glass cloth to more
vulnerable joint areas to increase abrasion resistance if
hard usage is expected. Glass tape, available in 3" and
6" (76mm and 152mm) widths, can be applied to
chines and keels without a great deal of extra work.
284
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 24-2  Load-bearing bulkheads can be made from two
pieces of thinner plywood with a framework sandwiched in
between. The bulkhead arrangement shown above handles the
main beam loads from a trimaran’s outriggers.
Figure 24-4 Details of typical chine joints.
Figure 24-3  In this set-up for a hard chine trimaran hull, the
builder has installed the chines and is fairing the frames.
Spruce or fir chine
Spruce or fir
chine log
Fiberglass tape
over the radius
Hardwood
cap
Plywood planking
Chine log
Epoxy
coated
end grain
Plywood sides
“Funky” 
trimaran chine
Spruce or fir chine log
Heavy laminated
plywood bottom
Fiberglass tape

--- PAGE 299 ---
To make a typical triangular chine log as shown in
Figure 24-4, begin by rough-shaping the chine stock as
close as possible to finished dimensions. Scarf the piece
to the proper length and attach it to the frames in the
set-up. Notch each frame to allow the chine log to sit in
position for final fairing. To speed up the notching
process, make a small marking guide from a piece of
sawn-off chine stock. As you lay out the notches, be
careful to adjust for any twist in the chine as it extends
from the bow to the midsection and back to the
transom. The angle of each frame at the chine will be
different, and you will have to shift the angle of the
chine log to compensate. Divide the angle change at
each frame so that you won’t increase bonding area on
one side at the expense of the other. You can get good
indications of the angle change and notching depth
from the body plan on the lofting board.
When you have completed the notching and fitting of
the chine, bond it to the frames, using clamps for
temporary pressure until the adhesive cures. Steel wood
screws that are later removed are a good alternative if
clamps are impractical. Staples are rarely used because
they will interfere with the heavy fairing that follows
after the chine is permanently bonded in position.
Because the chine in many boats is considered a major
structural element, it is usually fitted well to the stem
and transom. This is usually accomplished in the stem
by notching, but it can also be butted, provided that
there is sufficient bonding area. Chines are always
notched into the transom. Use either a triangular notch
or a full notch, but the chine should not pass through
the transom, exposing end grain. Bevel the chines using
the same techniques used to bevel the keel, as explained
in Chapter 19. At each station where the chine intersects
the frame, make saw cuts in the chine that represent
extensions of the frame on either side of the chine.
Notch the chines down to their true shape at each
frame station, as illustrated in Figure 24-5.
With most hulls, it is then relatively easy to achieve a
rough bevel on the chine using the notched-in bevel at
each station frame as a guide. Assuming that the chine
itself is bent around the frames in a fair curve, you can
use the edge of the chine like a batten to determine
whether your bevel is continuing fair from frame to
frame. To assist your eye in determining this fairness
between frames, you can lay a fairing batten directly on
the chine and hold it temporarily with clamps to detect
any high or low spots and mark them for further fairing.
If there are unusually large spacings between frames, it
can be very helpful at this point to install any longitu-
dinal stringers that are planned. Once the stringers are
installed, you can use them as helpful guides to assist
with the development of the chine bevel. Two or more
stringers notched into the flat area of the frames
between, say, the chine and the keel will act as excellent
guides to help develop the true surface over which the
exterior plywood panels will lie. You can use a straight-
edge to make a fair extension of the stringers down to
the chine, indicating both the position and exact angle
of the bevel on the chine at any point between frames.
You can use the same technique, of course, to achieve
proper bevels on both keel and sheer clamps.
Typically, the stringers are positioned across the frames
parallel to the sheer and keel at the desired intervals so
that they run out at the chine, intersecting with the
chine itself. This is not always necessary, and with
certain types of chine systems, it is better to run the
stringers parallel with the chines, allowing them to run
out at the sheer and/or keel. As with rounded hulls, you
can also position the stringers so that they taper toward
each other as they enter the bow and transom area.
When the framework is finished, use a straightedge to
final fair the flat surfaces between the chine and keel
and the chine and sheer (and the chine and chine on a
multiple chine hull). At no point should any of the
Chapter 24 – Hard Chine Plywood Construction
285
Figure 24-5  Notching the chine at the frame.
Notches sawn along
projection of mold
Gusset
Chine Frame

--- PAGE 300 ---
athwartship frame edges be even slightly higher than
any of the longitudinal members. This is especially
important if you are using thinner plywood for the
exterior skin because slightly high frames tend to
produce a slight athwartship distortion, which may be
noticeable in the finished hull. Edges that are too low
may also distort the hull shape.
Use a fairing batten and a piece of plywood measuring
approximately 1' (300mm) wide and 4' (1200mm) long
to determine overall fairness in both directions. The
plywood gives an indication as to how the panel will
actually lie when it is installed on the frame surface.
Because you will be fairing flat surfaces, longer hand
planes, such as jack planes, are very handy for final
fairing.
Some boat plans may call for compounding or bending
of the panels in two directions at the same time. You can
accomplish this by curving the frames slightly between
plywood joint positions, thus making the plywood
bend in both directions. While this compounding does
add to the stiffness of a plywood panel, difficulty can
quickly arise if caution is not used on hard chine
frame-supported plywood structures. Usually, the hard
chine method of construction is chosen because of its
ease and simplicity, and when you try to compound or
bend plywood in two directions on a frame-supported
surface, unwarranted complications can develop that can
easily nullify any benefits gained. There are excellent and
simple methods of compounding plywood which are
explained in Chapter 25, but this compounding is done
using a unique concept, where the compounded plywood
surface does not have to be made to fit a preformed
framework. (Also see discussion of compounding sheet
plywood on decks and cabin tops in Chapter 27.)
Fitting Panels
You must first decide how large a plywood panel you can
apply easily at one time. Generally, this depends on the
size of the boat you are building. With smaller dinghies,
it is common to apply a complete prescarfed panel over
one section of the hull in one bonding operation. With
larger boats, it will be easier to install smaller panels
and perform the scarf joint assembly right in place on
the boat hull, as discussed in Chapter 12.
Other benefits in using shorter panels include ease of
handling and more efficient use of material because
shorter panels create less scrap and are easier to mark
and fit prior to final application. In any case, a 16'
(4.8m) long panel is about the maximum length that
you will want to install on any hull at one time. Our
experience has been that it takes a very organized and
coordinated effort by a number of people to apply large
panels and to do a good job both in installation and
cleanup. The main problem is time. You need time to
apply adhesive to all of the stringers, frames, chines,
keel, stem, etc. More time is required to position the
panel and apply proper clamping pressure with staples.
Even after the panel is in final position, a little more
time will be needed to clean up the excess adhesive that
squeezes out between the ply and the framework before
it cures.
When scarfing in place on a hull, it’s usually best to
locate joints over bulkheads, frames, and other solid
components. If you are using plywood that is at least 3⁄8"
(9mm) thick, however, and have ample longitudinal
stringers for support, it’s possible to scarf anywhere
without the totally rigid support of a frame or
bulkhead. With thinner plywood, you can scarf over
temporary, plastic-wrapped butt blocks if a frame or
bulkhead isn’t handy.
There are a number of ways to mark panels for rough
sawing and accurate scarf alignment. The easiest
method is to clamp a sheet of plywood over the area it
will cover and adjust it for minimal waste. Then draw
pencil lines on the underside of the panel, using the
chine and keel or sheer and chine as guides. Cut the
sheet and check again for fit, and mark stringer and
scarf locations. To speed things up later, tack the panel
in place for this fitting and leave the nails in the
plywood to help align it. Surmark the panel to facilitate
installation. 
Scarfs should be evenly centered on frames. To pin down
their locations, first determine the length of the scarf
bevels. This should be eight times the plywood thick-
ness, so if you were applying 1⁄4" (6mm) plywood the
joint would be 2" (50mm) long. To mark a 2" scarf on
the panel, lay it out so that it centers on a 3⁄4" (18mm)
thick frame and its edges extend 5⁄8" (15mm) on either
side. (See Figure 24-6.) When the two panels are
286
Hull Construction Methods

--- PAGE 301 ---
marked, saw the plywood along the scarf edges and
machine the 8 to 1 bevel.
If fitting whole panels to your hull is impractical, use
heavy brown paper to transfer the panel shape quickly
from the framework to the sheet ply. Lightly staple the
brown paper over the framework and trace the outline
of the framework area that the panels are to cover.
Remove the paper from the framework and cut out the
marked perimeter. Transfer the outline to the sheet ply.
Because this method may be less accurate, leave a little
larger safety margin beyond the marked edge as you are
sawing out the panel. Position this rough-cut panel on
the hull and mark accurately for scarf joint location and
any other marking that might be helpful (perhaps noting
a gap area that may require more adhesive). Surmark
the panels so that you can reposition them easily and
accurately when you are bonding them in place.
It doesn’t appear to be important whether you install
the bottom panels or the side panels on a hull first.
Ease in application and in cleaning up excess epoxy
should be the determining factors. Normally, we prefer
to apply the hull bottom (top when the hull is inverted)
panels first, only because we can step in between the
frames to get closer to the keel area.
When the panels are fitted and ready for installation, we
always precoat and then sand the interior surface of each
panel prior to installation. This saves on interior finishing
time. An alternative to coating individual panels after
they are cut out is to coat entire sheets of plywood prior
to cutting out the individual panels. Although this
method involves some waste, it can save time.
Marking Panels for Stapling
When bonding the panel to the general framework, you
need to know where all of the stringers, frames, and
chine positions are so that you can accurately and
quickly staple the panel to the framework in exactly the
right places. To do this, mark the positions of the entire
framework on the outside of the panel so that you can
staple along these lines with accuracy. One of the
advantages of running the stringers parallel with the
chines or sheer is that you can make up a marking
gauge to transfer the chine and stringer locations
quickly to the sheet ply after it is applied in position.
(See Figure 24-7.)
Chapter 24 – Hard Chine Plywood Construction
287
Figure 24-6  Marking and bonding plywood scarf joints on
the hull.
Figure 24-7  A gauge for marking the stringer position on
decks or side panels.
This dimension depends on
scarf length and frame size.
The scarf should be centered
over the frame.
Frame
Short staples through
pads along feather edge
Compass
Longer staples through pads
into stringers or frames
Side or deck panel
Frame
Curvature of side or
decking should keep one
of the scarf’s feather
edges tight. However
the entire joint shou