e over the scarf joint area to
ensure good bonds. When clamping a large number of
joints at one time, you may need to tighten the clamps
at several intervals as excess adhesive slowly squeezes
out of the joints.
Fairing up scarf joints
A scarf joint is almost finished when its adhesive has
cured. The final steps in scarfing are always fairing
and cleanup. Excess epoxy inevitably squeezes out
around the joint and must be removed. If you have any
misalignment within your scarf, you will need to fair
into the overall dimensions of the stock. We suggest
that you take care of these matters when the epoxy is
partially cured—5 to 8 hours after application the
joint should be strong enough to allow you to remove
clamps—because at this stage the epoxy is easiest to
sand and plane. After 5 to 7 days, the work will be
much more difficult.
Remove the temporary locating staples before you begin
fairing. Hand-held block planes are the basic tools
for fairing scarf joints. Using two of them, each at a
different blade setting, speeds up the fairing process
when you have a lot of scarf joints to do. Set the blade
on the second block plane for a finer cut to remove the
last bits of material. Then use an 11" (275mm) sanding
block with 60-grit paper to smooth out any plane
marks and finish the joint.
Chapter 12 – Scarfing
111
Figure 12-5 Plastic sheeting woven back and forth between
stringers contains the excess epoxy runout and prevents
bonding of the stringers to each other. When placing this plastic
sheet, avoid pinching the plastic in any of the scarf joints.

--- PAGE 126 ---
Scarfing Plywood Panels
There are major differences between scarfing lumber
and scarfing commercially manufactured plywood
panels. One significant dissimilarity is dimension: a 6"
or 8" (150mm or 200mm) wide scarf joint in lumber is
considered large, but a 4' (1200mm) or even 8'
(2400mm) wide scarf joint in plywood is standard.
Plywood is usually much thinner than lumber and
therefore plywood bevels are usually shorter. Unlike
bevels in stock, which consist entirely of end-grain
wood, plywood bevels have both end and flat grain.
Because plywood differs from lumber as a material, the
methods used to cut plywood bevels and bond
plywood scarf joints are somewhat different from
those used with lumber.
Plywood is such a commonly used material in modern
wooden boatbuilding that the ability to join plywood
panels with a sufficiently strong joint is of major impor-
tance. The average boatbuilding project also uses
enough plywood so that plywood scarfing requires a
significant number of labor-hours in relation to the
boatbuilding project as a whole. We recognized this
problem long ago in our own shop and developed a
guide which could be assembled on a table saw to
direct a plywood panel across the table saw blade and
create a perfectly sawn bevel edge in a short period
of time. The only difficulty with this fixture was that
we had to use the table saw for many other things
and, therefore, had to set up and remove the fixture
frequently. The set-up procedure required at least 20
minutes, so unless we had a lot of bevels to cut on
plywood, we usually planed them by hand.
To solve this problem, we adapted our table saw device
and attached the guide to the bottom of a hand-held
circular saw. What we liked best about this tool was
that we could leave it in place on the saw, ready for use
at any time with no set-up required. The combined cost
of a saw and attachment was so low that we could well
afford the luxury of keeping the device permanently
attached to an extra saw. Eventually, because we found
it so useful, we added it to our line of WEST SYSTEM
products. We also show another alternative, building
a production jig for cutting plywood scarfs.
The Scarffer™ attachment
The Scarffer circular saw attachment, shown in Figures
12-6 through 12-8, is inexpensive and can be bolted to
the bottoms of most 714" hand-held circular saws. It
comes with step-by-step instructions for attaching it to
a saw, setting up plywood panels, and sawing bevels.
The Scarffer attachment is ideal for work with plywood
up to 14" (6mm) thick, and with minor hand finishing
may be used on panels up to 12" (12mm) thick. We feel
that it is an investment that quickly pays for itself in
labor savings, even on small projects. Bevels cut with
the Scarffer attachment can be more accurate than hand-
cut joints, especially when you have little experience
making scarfs by hand.
112
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 12-6  Setting up a straightedge for the Scarffer 
attachment.
Figure 12-7 Cutting a scarf bevel by running the saw with
the Scarffer attached along the straightedge.

--- PAGE 127 ---
Building a production jig for cutting plywood scarfs
You can also build a jig for cutting plywood scarfs with
a circular saw, as shown in Figure 12-9. This jig can be
set over an existing table or made freestanding. The jig
lets you cut an accurate bevel on the end of a plywood
panel and doesn’t tie up your circular saw with a semi-
permanent attachment like the Scarffer. 
A standard circular saw is guided by a track mounted
on the end of the table, below the table’s edge. You can
make the guide of 3⁄4" (18mm) plywood. Mount it at the
appropriate angle to form an 8-to-1 bevel with relation
to the table top when the saw is set for a normal 90°
cut. The plywood forms a flat plane that the base of the
circular saw can follow. A permanently mounted
straightedge strip holds the saw at the appropriate
height and guides it along the length of the cut. Set this
tool up with a clamping bar to hold the plywood flat
against the table. The clamping bar should include a
feature that will protect the operator from the exposed
saw blade while the scarf is being cut. The advantage of
this jig is that it lets you use a circular saw without
modifications. Nothing is attached to it, and the
retractable blade guard is left to operate freely.
Making bevels by hand
A prime requirement for hand beveling is a flat table
or bench of sufficient size and with an edge that will
support the plywood edge you are beveling. Position
Figure 12-9 A jig for cutting plywood scarfs.
Chapter 12 – Scarfing
113
Figure 12-8 A plywood panel with a bevel cut using the
Scarffer attachment.
Table Saw Track (section)
Blade guard
Clamping bar
Closed cell
foam strip
Blocking
Extend 2 x 4 beyond table
edge for clamping
Table Fence (section)
1/4" Gap allows sawdust
to fall through
Blocking 12" – 16" O.C.
Table
fence
Clamping bar
Saw track
Metal straight edge
Circular Saw Method
Plywood bevel
Cutting table
Adjust track
width to match
saw base
8:1 Angle
Spacer
Metal edge

--- PAGE 128 ---
the plywood so that the edge to be beveled is lined up
perfectly with the edge of the table or bench and clamp
it down. Draw a bevel line along the length of the
plywood just as you would with lumber stock. Usually
you would have an 8-to-1 bevel, so if you were using
1/4" (6mm) plywood, you would draw the bevel line 2"
(48mm) from the edge of the plywood. Because of the
length involved and the fact that plywood edges are
usually straight, we usually use a marking gauge to
transfer this distance for the bevel line.
The basic tools you will need for hand beveling are a
block plane and a smoothing plane. Using a power
plane can save a lot of time in roughing the scarf bevel
down close to its intended dimension, but without this
luxury use a smoothing plane with a sharp, deep-set
blade to remove a majority of the stock as quickly as
possible. Then use a more finely set block plane to
finish off the scarf bevel, being careful to keep the bevel
straight and flat as you proceed. Keep the plane blades
sharp at all times. Otherwise, the alternating grain in
the plywood edge will begin to cut at different rates,
causing unevenness in the bevel face. This problem
means you also have to use sandpaper with extreme
caution because it will sand the two directions of grain
at different rates, also causing unevenness. The only
real defense against the grain problem is to sharpen the
plane blade frequently. The plane will lose its fine
cutting edge quickly when you plane plywood due to
the adhesive between plies. The lines created by the
various plies in the plywood give a good indication of
progress you are making when planing the bevel. Any
humps or unevenness in the bevel usually show up as a
crooked line when you sight down the glue line
between the laminations.
Hand beveling can be tedious and difficult, but it is like
a lot of other boatbuilding jobs in that it is a learned
skill and your quality and speed improve with time. If
you have never done hand beveling, we suggest that
you practice on a few scrap pieces of plywood.
Occasionally, plywood bevels get messed up beyond
repair, but a mistake does not usually mean disaster.
Simply mark in a new bevel line an inch or so beyond
the old line and start the whole procedure over again.
You can save a good deal of time when hand beveling
by setting up several panels in a stack for simultaneous
planing. For instance, assume that you want to plane
bevels on four 1⁄4" panels all at once. Draw 2" bevel
lines, which represent 8-to-1 bevels across all the
panels, and stack all four of the panels on top of one
another on a flat table. Place the edge of the bottom
panel flush with the edge of the table. Then place the
second panel with its edge matching the bevel line of
the first panel, and the third panel with its edge
matching the bevel line of the second panel, and so
on. Clamp the whole stack to the table and plane one
continuous bevel over all of the panel ends. (See
Figures 12-12 and 12-13.)
However you cut the bevels, we do add one note of
caution about laying out the bevels if you plan on
natural finishing. It is not uncommon to receive
plywood panels that have a higher quality veneer on
one side than the other. Be sure to lay out the bevel
angles on the proper side of the plywood panels so
when you join the panels, the good surfaces are
always on the same side of the joined panels.
Bonding plywood scarf joints
Plywood panels, beveled by hand or with the Scarffer
attachment, are more difficult than lumber to line up
and join for bonding. You can quickly learn to assemble
small scarf joints with nothing more than your sense
of touch and several clamps. Long plywood scarf joints,
on the other hand, are troublesome to fit and may
require complex clamping procedures. Because the
114
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 12-10 Use a power plane to rough shape a scarf
bevel. Finish shaping the bevel with a block plane.

--- PAGE 129 ---
possibility of aggregate error is high, we recommend
against clamping a number of wide scarf joints in a
single operation.
To prepare plywood scarf joints for bonding, first line
up the bevels to check them for mating accuracy. This
requires a flat working surface—either a floor or a
bench that is large enough to accommodate the two
pieces being joined. You will need a steel straightedge
about 1' (300mm) long to lay across the face of the
scarf joint to help sight it from above. Mate the two
beveled surfaces by pushing them into each other,
tapping them a fraction of an inch at a time. Between
taps, press the bevels from the top with your hand,
holding both plywood panels flush with the underlying
surface. Then place the straightedge across the joint; if
the bevels are meeting correctly with no overlap, the
straightedge should be touching both surfaces evenly.
If there is an overlap of the bevels, the straightedge will
rock slightly on the featheredge and stand high on one
side or the other of the panels. If there is a gap between
the beveled surfaces, simply sighting the edge of the
scarf should indicate this. Occasionally there may be
an advantage in tapping the panels together until the
straightedge indicates that a slight override exists
between the bevel surfaces. Then, draw the two panels
from each other in very small increments until the
straightedge again reads that a flat surface exists
between the two panels. With long scarf joints, line
up the bevel carefully on one edge and then insert a
temporary staple. Then line up the opposite edge in
similar fashion and insert a staple in it. If you have
machined the bevels straight on both panels, the mating
between the two in the center portion of the panel
should follow the accuracy that is developed at either
end. When the panels are in perfect alignment, make
surmarks across the faces of both panels so that when
you apply adhesive, you can reassemble them in the
exact position. Make the surmarks across the scarf joint
edge at approximately a 45° angle. Make at least two
surmarks, one at each edge of the panel, and insert as
many as you need in between.
Apply the adhesive to the beveled plywood faces using
either one of the methods described for use with
lumber. Lumber bevels are composed entirely of end-
grain wood, but at least one third and perhaps as much
as two thirds of the joint face of plywood will be flat
grain. This will not absorb the large amounts of epoxy
that end grain does, so you can apply less epoxy and
still be sure of a sound bond between panels.
Chapter 12 – Scarfing
115
Figure 12-11 Planing narrow plywood strips with a block
plane.
Figure 12-12 Stacking 1⁄4" thick panels to cut several 8-to-1 scarf bevels simultaneously. The setback of each panel is based on
the panel thickness and bevel ratio.
Clamps should be placed
as close as possible to
the scarf.
Bench
2"
2"
2"
2"
1⁄4"

--- PAGE 130 ---
Clamping plywood scarf joints
The potential problem with the plywood scarf joint is
achieving proper clamping pressure. A large, flat work
surface of the size used to fit the joint is required for
clamping, but with one additional provision. The work
surface must be of a material which will receive staples
or small nails. If needed, you can position several sheets
of 3/4" (18mm) thick sheathing grade plywood over
your floor or the workbench to receive fasteners readily.
Cover that part of the work surface that will be beneath
the scarf joint with wax paper or polyethylene sheet.
Apply the bonding adhesive, position the panels on the
flat surface, and join the bevel surfaces together so that
the surmarks line up. Then position a locating staple in
each edge of the joint to prevent any movement of the
two panels while you are clamping. Cover the top of
the joint with wax paper and place a strip of plywood
over the paper at the scarf joint. This plywood strip
should be about the same thickness as the material
being spliced together and should be wide enough to
cover at least the entire area of the splice. Drive a suffi-
cient number of staples or nails through the strip and
the scarf joint into the receiving material below,
drawing the two beveled surfaces firmly together.
You can create adequate pressure with staples when
clamping plywood up to 1/4" (6mm) thick. With thicker
panels, nailing is recommended. When using nails, we
usually use a much thicker clamping strip, of perhaps
3/4" (18mm) stock, so that fewer nails are necessary for
even pressure over the entire surface area. A piece of
curved stock, held in place with clamps as shown in
Figure 12-14, will help distribute clamping pressure
evenly across your joint.
Because you may be bonding wide panels, it is
extremely important to fair up these joints while the
adhesive is still in its partial cure stage. Use the same
tools and procedures to clean up and fair plywood scarf
joints as you would use with lumber scarf joints. It
works best to do the cleanup and fairing operations
while the plywood is still lying on a flat surface; this is
especially important with thinner plywood.
Scarfing in Place
Very often in a boatbuilding job, you may need a scarfed
panel of very large dimensions (for example, a complete
deck surface) which is impractical to install in one piece.
To solve this problem, we have developed a technique to
scarf together plywood panels right in place on the hull
as they are being installed. This scarfing-in-place proce-
dure adds two difficulties in the basic plywood bonding
operations: (l) the measuring, marking, and fitting of the
116
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 12-13 Cutting scarf bevels on stacked panels.
Figure 12-14 Three methods for clamping scarf joints during
bonding.
Curved clamping piece
For thin plywood or veneers,
use staples through pads on
the feather edge.
Plastic
Sheet
With thicker plywood,
fewer nails are needed
Backing blocks, table
or floor under scarf
In all cases, use several staples to
secure the scarf and prevent slipping
during the clamping or nailing operations.

--- PAGE 131 ---
bevels on the two panels to be joined will require a great
deal of extra planning if the scarf joint is to be made over
a solid portion of the hull framework; and (2) the two
plywood panels will require more clamping because they
will be bent over a curved surface rather than laid on a
flat surface. The degree of curvature involved will deter-
mine how much clamping pressure is needed to
overcome the natural tendency of the plywood panel
to resist the bending forces.
In most situations, it is easier to place the scarf joint
over a solid member of the hull framework when you
are scarfing in place. This may be a frame, bulkhead, 
or stringer large enough to receive staples, nails, or
screws of sufficient length and numbers to generate the
needed pressure. Plan the scarf joints carefully so that
the bevels will center themselves directly on this solid
point when you install the panels. Even with careful
measuring, you may have to sacrifice some plywood in
order to locate the scarf joint properly because of the
existing hull or deck framework location. Follow the
normal procedure for clamping; however, you may
need to generate much more pressure to pull the joints
properly in place for contact to take place. To generate
maximum pressure, use temporary steel screws in
conjunction with washers and insert them in pilot holes
which are drilled through the clamping strip and
through the scarf joint into the receiving solid member
in the interior framework. Scarfing in place is commonly
done in constructing hulls and decks with sheet
plywood. Chapters 24 and 27 give more detailed expla-
nations of the measuring and installation procedures.
Scarfing to Reduce the Scrap Rate
In the past, the scrap rate could reach close to 40% of
materials purchased for a given project. You can reduce
this figure substantially by the proper use of the scarf
joint. When you consider that longer lengths of both
plywood and lumber are sold at premium prices, it is
easy to understand that being able to use shorter
lengths of material can be extremely cost-effective.
Quality plywood is not only expensive, but much of it
may be wasted because of its limited length. A typical
example is the use of plywood for laminating strips
when molding hulls. On a larger boat, the lengths you
need may vary anywhere from 9' to 14' (2.7m to 4.3m),
depending upon the area of the hull where you apply
the strips. With this variation, no matter how careful
the planning, significant waste will occur. 
However, you can cut the waste to less than 5% by
making up extremely long panels (as long as your
working space will allow) from which you can then cut
carefully measured lengths. It is not uncommon for us
to make up 50' (15m) long plywood panels, perhaps
12" (300mm) wide, from which the major waste might
be at most several feet at the end. The smaller scrap
pieces become, the less value they have because of the
increasingly limited areas in which they can be used. So
joining several smaller pieces together to make up a
larger piece can be time well spent. 
When making up stringers, planking, sheer clamps, or
keels, a little planning can pay big dividends. Try to
determine ahead of time, within a foot or two, the exact
lengths of each member required and then plan a
combination of stock and scarf joints that will come
closest to the desired length. For instance, you could
join two 18' boards into one 35' length; if needed, make
a shorter 26' length by joining one 18-footer with half
of another 18-footer. Then use the other half of the 18-
footer to join with yet a smaller 14-footer to form a
plank 22' in length, and so on. If you have made up a
list of all plank lengths needed for your project, you can
methodically begin to make the best use of your stock
by developing those lengths most easily made. Then
make up those lengths where you may have to accept a
higher scrap rate, which at some point is always
unavoidable. The point is that prior planning will
enable you to make the best use of the stock you have
on hand.
Chapter 12 – Scarfing
117

--- PAGE 132 ---
118
Core Boatbuilding Techniques

--- PAGE 133 ---
The term synthetic fiber includes fiberglass (glass fiber), carbon (graphite) fiber, aramids (Kevlar™),
and low-modulus fibers like Dynel™ and polypropylene. These fibers share similarities with wood, such
as being strong parallel to the fiber direction and weaker off-axis. In most cases, the density of synthetic
fibers is greater than that of wood.
When this book was written in 1979, the materials and techniques it described were the “cutting edge” of
boat construction. The use of wood was in serious decline, and many boats were being built with fiberglass
and polyester resins. Because a solid fiberglass laminate is several times heavier than an equal volume of
a wood laminate and not as stiff, Gougeon Brothers were not keen on using fiberglass. Indeed, our mindset
in the 1970s might be summed up by the sign on the wall in the boatshop: “If God had wanted us to use
fiberglass, He would have created fiberglass trees.”
Nonetheless, we at Gougeon Brothers did realize the value of synthetic fibers early on. At the time, carbon
fiber and Kevlar were primarily aerospace materials, but we experimented with their uses in boatbuilding,
mostly to reinforce wood locally in areas such as centerboards, rudders, and masts. We also recognized
the value of bonding a woven fabric, such as fiberglass, with epoxy to exterior surfaces of a boat to
increase durability and resist abrasion and impact loads. Not much was known then about how these
synthetic fibers would interact with wood. Time has proved their effectiveness.
The technology of manufacturing fiberglass, carbon fiber, Kevlar, and other synthetic fibers has advanced
rapidly. Fiber manufacturers have developed better sizings for their fibers as well as more sophisticated
weaving techniques. Since this book was last revised in 1985, Gougeon Brothers, Inc. has become a
leading proponent of the use of synthetic fibers. We have developed testing techniques, including the
Hydromat™ Test Method (ASTM D-6416), that characterize the strength and stiffness of low-density core
sandwich composites as well as solid synthetic fiber laminates. These test data are used by naval archi-
tects, laminate engineers, and composites scientists. 
A large volume of data now exists on static and fatigue performance of solid fiberglass and carbon fiber
laminate and sandwich composites. Much of this information is in the public domain and can be found on
Internet sites such as www.sandia.gov and in NASA documents.
We have not tried to incorporate all the new information about synthetic fibers into the 5th edition 
because, as explained in the Preface, this book represents a snapshot in time. So this chapter remains
largely unchanged from when it was written except to reflect the current WEST SYSTEM® product line and
to discuss special application techniques for clear finishing. Nonetheless, it provides an excellent
overview of synthetic fibers and their use with WEST SYSTEM epoxy.
There are many areas in wooden boat construction
where we and many others have successfully used
synthetic fibers to augment wood structures and increase
their overall capability. Synthetic fiber augmentation has
been particularly effective in areas where constrained
geometry is necessary. Centerboards, rudders, and
masts are all components where denser, high-strength
fibers can be incorporated with wood to improve
performance.
For hulls, the fiberglass-covered, wood strip composite
process described in Chapter 23 has proved to be an
excellent mating of wood and synthetic fibers. In more
typical wood/WEST SYSTEM Brand epoxy construction,
synthetic fibers are regularly used to increase exterior
Synthetic Fibers and WEST SYSTEM
® Epoxy
C H A P T E R
13

--- PAGE 134 ---
hull and deck durability by providing a denser outer
surface to resist abrasion and impact loads. This is
usually accomplished by sheathing exterior surfaces
of a boat with a woven fabric which is bonded to the
wood with epoxy. Glass fiber is by far the most impor-
tant and popular synthetic because of its low cost,
ready availability in many different weaves, and ease of
handling. However, carbon and aramid fibers are used
increasingly in areas where weight or stiffness is critical.
The decision to use fabric sheathing and structural
synthetic fiber augmentation should be made carefully,
with particular attention to the extra cost and weight
involved. There are a potentially infinite number of
ways to assemble combinations of wood, synthetic
fibers, and epoxy into a structure. Be aware when speci-
fying an assortment of materials into a composite
matrix that a wide variation in material properties can
result. For example, a combination that has high
specific stiffness may have very low impact strength. 
Unfortunately, for most composite material combina-
tions, there are no scantling rules. Some results of static
and fatigue testing of various wood and fiberglass
laminates are provided in Appendices C and E. These
data can be used in the development of composite
laminates, but we suggest you seek the help of materials
experts and directly test specific laminates before
making final decisions on scantlings for a given craft.
A Survey of Synthetic Fibers and Cloths
Both synthetic fibers and natural fibers may be used
with WEST SYSTEM epoxy in boatbuilding. Excellent
results may be obtained when synthetic fibers are
applied to wooden structures at room temperature
with minimal bonding pressure. The performance
characteristics of the wood, however, will dominate
the composite unless considerable synthetic fiber
reinforcement has been used. Synthetic fibers can be
easy to maintain and most have good strength-to-
weight ratios, but they can be difficult to machine
with typical woodworking tools.
Fiberglass, Kevlar™ aramid, and graphite (carbon fiber)
are popular modern structural materials, which have
applications in boat construction. Fiberglass, available
in E(electrical) and S(structural) grades, is denser and
has less stiffness and tensile strength than either Kevlar
or graphite. Fiberglass has more impact strength than
graphite. Kevlar 49 has higher impact resistance and
tensile strength than fiberglass and graphite, and it has
the highest strength-to-density ratio of the fibers, but it
is relatively weak in compression. Graphite, also called
carbon, has the highest stiffness-to-density ratio of 
the three.
Since fiberglass, aramid, and graphite have clear
strengths and weaknesses, it’s fairly easy to decide
among them. Lightweight (up to 6 oz or 200g/m2)
fiberglass, which is white and opaque, will become
transparent when it is wet out with epoxy. Kevlar and
graphite are yellow and black respectively and there-
fore are not appropriate for sheathing boats which will
be naturally finished (although recently, both fabrics
have gained popularity as high tech fashion statements
and are often left exposed as the outer layer). Kevlar’s
high tensile strength and impact resistance can be
exploited, but it should not be relied upon for high
compression loading. Kevlar is impossible to fair and 
it becomes fuzzy when it is sanded. Although it is
moderately priced compared to graphite, Kevlar is
considerably more expensive than fiberglass. Graphite
can be especially helpful in building small or intricately
shaped components, which must be quite stiff, but its
brittleness and price restrict its use in other applica-
tions.
Three other synthetic fibers have been used extensively
in boatbuilding. Dynel™ acrylic, polyester, and poly-
propylene fabrics are low-modulus materials, which
stretch much more than glass fibers to resist a load.
One popular theory is that this may be an advantage
if a hull is damaged by a sharp object—an outer skin
of fabric might stretch rather than tear and serve as a
bladder to keep the boat afloat. Meanwhile, under
normal conditions, these fabrics are parasitic: they
contribute weight, but very little strength or stiffness
to the structure. An alternative is to use Kevlar, which
can pay for its weight in added strength and stiffness
when fiberglass cannot provide sufficient impact resist-
ance. Kevlar will, however, significantly increase the
cost of a hull.
Dynel, polyester, and polypropylene are quite inexpen-
sive compared to the other reinforcing fibers, but some
aspects of their application can be difficult. In some
120
Core Boatbuilding Techniques

--- PAGE 135 ---
cases, they do not become transparent when they are
wet out. They tend to float in epoxy, and this may cause
an irregular surface which requires additional fairing.
These fibers do not abrade well, so this process can be
difficult.
All of these synthetics are available in many forms.
Fiberglass, for example, is sold as chopped fibers,
chopped strand mat, roving, and cloths woven with
twisted and untwisted yarns. Woven cloths are sold by
weight—a square yard of 6 oz cloth weighs 6 ounces,
and a square yard of 17 oz cloth weighs 17 ounces.
Weave patterns affect the feel and handling of the cloth
and can detract from its physical properties, particularly
in fatigue, because of stress where the yarns cross. Woven
cloth is better than matting insofar as it permits precise
alignment of fibers. Twisted yarns tend to be weaker
than untwisted yarns because filaments can be fractured
in spinning. “Knit” unidirectional cloths provide the
best alignment of fibers under load. Biaxial, triaxial, and
quadraxial fabrics are now available. In these, layers of
unidirectional fabric are sewn together, one layer atop
another, with each layer oriented on a different axis.
Most fibers, synthetic and natural, are treated with
sizing to protect them from moisture and to enhance
adhesion. Some of these finishes were designed to be
more compatible with epoxy, some with polyester
resins. In the past, compatibility was more of an issue
than it is today. WEST SYSTEM epoxy is compatible with
both finishes, but if you are using new or unfamiliar
fabric, you should test it for wet out, especially if a
clear finish is desired.
Combinations of wood and reinforcing fibers may be
used to take advantage of the strengths and weaknesses
of the fibers. If, for example, you sheathe a hull with
Kevlar for impact strength, you may also have to add
an exterior layer of fiberglass to prevent abrading the
aramid during fairing. As we explain more thoroughly
in Appendix E, two or more layers of synthetic fibers
can be laid together on a wood laminate, or they can
be interspersed between layers of wood. In an attempt
to increase impact resistance, it may be more efficient
to laminate a layer of Kevlar near the interior of a hull,
where loads will be in tension and fairing problems
minimized. Then a fiberglass skin can be added on the
exterior.
Fatigue Behavior of Synthetic Fibers
As we were testing fatigue behavior in wood, another
NASA program investigated fatigue resistance in several
glass fiber composites. From this, several conclusions
can be drawn about both glass fibers and the resin used
to bond them. The type of resin played a significant
part in high cycle fatigue resistance. Polyester-bonded
samples were about 8% stronger in one-time, load-to-
failure static capability than epoxy-bonded samples.
In high cycle fatigue, however, the roles reversed: the
polyester laminate retained less than 19% of its original
one-time static strength. (For more detailed discussion,
see Appendix C.)
Failure occurs in glass laminate in two distinct ways.
Early on, even in the first few cycles, a matrix cracking
and debonding occur, primarily because of glass’s low
elastic modulus. At about 100,000 cycles—or, if a boat
is subjected to cyclic load increases associated with
waves every 3 seconds, after about 83 hours of sailing—
the glass fibers, having relieved themselves of small
discontinuities, become the dominating factor through
to final failure. At the early low cycle matrix debonding
stage, there is significant loss of residual mechanical
properties, including stiffness. This is probably what
causes some fiberglass racing boats to get soft and lose
their competitive edge.
Common Uses for Fiberglass Cloth
Glass cloth is regularly used for protection in high
abrasion areas. We use it on interior surfaces of center-
board trunks and cases for retracting rudder blades. We
also cover the centerboards, daggerboards, and rudders
that move in these cases with cloth for abrasion resist-
ance and increased strength. The end grain in plywood
joints can be protected with cloth or tape. Joints in high
traffic areas receive more abuse than other areas, so we
often use glass tape on them. In Chapter 24, we discuss
the use of glass tape on plywood chines.
Although we do not always use fiberglass cloth on high-
quality, marine-grade plywood, an exterior layer of cloth
is necessary for finishing soft or rotary-peeled plywood.
For boats planked with soft woods like Western red
cedar, a layer of fiberglass provides a tougher, more
abrasion and impact resistant surface. Fiberglass can
Chapter 13 – Synthetic Fibers and WEST SYSTEM® Epoxy
121

--- PAGE 136 ---
make Douglas fir ply much easier to work and more
reliable over time. Cloth sheathing will also prevent
the surface checking which is so common with fir
plywood.
A layer of cloth serves as a screed and helps to maintain
an adequate thickness of epoxy coating, creating a more
durable surface. Without the cloth, it’s easy to sand away
a lot of epoxy and leave little to protect the wood surface.
Glass cloth is also useful for structural purposes. In
strip composite construction, it increases hull strength
and stiffness. In other types of hulls, it can improve
local strength and stiffness, especially in areas where
loads do not coincide with the orientation of the wood
grain or when extra support is needed to balance
uneven numbers of layers of wood. Additional wood
will also increase hull strength and stiffness, and it is
often cheaper and lighter to use, but in some areas
constrained geometry doesn’t allow enough room.
Layers of cloth can rapidly turn 5-ply panels into 7-ply
panels, and do so in such a way that a layer with a
higher modulus of elasticity is further away from the
neutral axis. When fiberglass cloth is applied to a
curved panel, it is neutral while the wood below it
is prestressed. The cloth helps the entire panel retain
its shape, and it can reduce the number of stringers
needed for longitudinal support. When fiberglass is
laid away from the neutral axis between layers of a
wood laminate, it can help control springback. In
other applications, it restricts cross-grain shrinking,
swelling, and splitting.
We often use lightweight, 4 oz to 6 oz (135g/m2 to
200g/m2) woven glass to cover the many hundreds
of tiny staple holes on the exterior surfaces of hand-
laminated hulls. To do this, we coat the hull, let the
epoxy cure, and sand it lightly. The epoxy seals the
end grain in staple holes so that they will not absorb
too much epoxy as the cloth is applied. Then we apply
the fiberglass in the normal manner.
On naturally finished hulls, lightweight fiberglass cloth
can be particularly useful. Just as cloth covers staple
holes, it will cover some smaller flaws, and the fabric
will hold clear epoxy in small voids until it cures. Flaws
and voids may also be filled with tinted epoxy, a tech-
nique used on major imperfections, but the results are
unsightly by comparison. Suggestions on the best ways
to treat larger flaws are provided later in this chapter.
Although it is cheaper than Kevlar and graphite, fiber-
glass is more expensive than wood, and its application
is time-consuming. To decide if a sheathing material is
warranted for a project, make test panels out of the
wood you plan to use. Judge the effectiveness of any
fabric according to weight increase per square foot,
relative increase in stiffness and strength, resistance to
abrasion and impact, difficulty of application, and cost.
Surface Preparation
for Reinforcing Fabrics
Before applying any cloth, roll an initial coating of WEST
SYSTEM epoxy over the bare wood surface following
instructions in Chapter 15. Fill all depressions and
voids with epoxy thickened with low-density filler. The
initial coating doesn’t need to be completely cured, but
if putty is applied while the epoxy is still fluid, it may
disturb the surface and result in more sanding later.
Some builders prefer to allow the initial coating to cure
completely, and then wipe it with a damp cloth and
sand it lightly or scrape it with a cabinet scraper before
filling. The smoother surface may allow for a more
precise puttying operation, which requires less sanding.
On bright finished boats, we try to fill voids as attrac-
tively as possible, ignoring very small nicks and relying
on the cloth to hold enough epoxy in place to fill them.
Sometimes we mix epoxy with fillers and other ingredi-
ents to make putties that blend in with the color of the
surrounding wood and use these to fill larger voids. At
other times, we mix about 2 oz (60ml) of 105 Resin and
207 Special Coating Hardener and let it stand for about
45 minutes at 70°F (21°C), or until it is a thick, clear
paste which can be directly applied to voids. To keep it
from sagging, we cover the paste with a small piece of
polyethylene, pressing the patch smooth to fair it into
the overall surface. Then, when the epoxy has cured,
we remove the plastic and sand the surface fair. We
always try to avoid sanding through the initial coating
of surfaces that will be naturally finished because sanded
areas will show up noticeably lighter after recoating.
(Much of this discoloration will modify with time.)
When the initial coating and puttying applications have
cured, begin sanding or scraping the epoxy coating very
122
Core Boatbuilding Techniques

--- PAGE 137 ---
lightly. Then do a more thorough job on all puttied areas
until you have removed the fuzzy feel of the cured epoxy
and the filled spots are fair and smooth. We usually use
a 2,000 rpm electric polisher with a 7" soft foam disc
pad and 80-grit aluminum oxide paper for this job,
but a sanding block and 50 or 80-grit paper will also
work. Vacuum or sweep the surface to remove all
residue. Particles the size of sand granules can help
trap air between substrate and cloth and cause serious
bonding problems.
Applying Fabric
All fabrics can be applied to surfaces in one of three
general methods. The dry method, applying fabric to
a dry surface, has several advantages. The fabric is easy
to control and, because you can use limited quantities
of epoxy at any time, there is no rush. It is an easier
method for one person to manage. Applying fiberglass
where a clear finish is desired, such as stripper canoes
and kayaks, requires some special considerations and a
variation of the dry method. The dry method for clear
finishes uses WEST SYSTEM 105 Resin combined with
207 Special Coating Hardener. The 105 Resin/207
Hardener combination is preferable for areas that will
be naturally finished for both the dry method and the
wet method.
The dry method will not work on overhead and vertical
surfaces, so in those areas, you need to rely on a wet
method, that is, applying fabric to a surface coated
with wet epoxy. With the wet method, speed is of some
importance because the timing of the operation is
affected by the initial surface coating. This method can
be tricky, especially overhead, and may require the
organized efforts of two or three people. 
The Dry Method
If the surface is fairly flat, lay the cut cloth over it and
smooth all wrinkles. Use staples or masking tape to
hold it in place, slightly overlapping any cloth joints.
When the material is in position, pour mixed epoxy
directly on the fabric. Begin by mixing small quantities
of epoxy and increase batch size as you gain more
experience. Use a flexible plastic spreader or squeegee
to spread the epoxy and to remove any pools which
form. Firm pressure is necessary, but don’t press so
hard that you shift the cloth. 
The Dry Method for Clear Finishing
Take special steps if you are applying fiberglass to a
naturally finished hull and want it to be clear and
transparent. Pouring a puddle of epoxy on the fiber-
glass cloth and spreading it around with a spreader, as
described in the dry method, is a quick way to wet out
fiberglass. However, it may result in a blotchy looking
fiberglass job because the puddle area has much less air
trapped in the fiberglass weave than the surrounding
area to which the epoxy was spread. This does not create
a problem if the surface is to be painted, but if you are
aiming for a naturally finished surface, the techniques
described in Figure 13-2, while a little more time
consuming, will yield a better looking job.
Chapter 13 – Synthetic Fibers and WEST SYSTEM® Epoxy
123
Figure 13-1 Applying fiberglass to the deck of the 60'
(18.2m) proa Slingshot using the dry method. Applicators
have wet out the glass cloth around the daggerboard slot 
and are working toward the bow and stern.

--- PAGE 138 ---
124
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Fiberglass Application for Clear Finishing
These techniques have been perfected by Ted Moores, an expert
on clear wood strip/fiberglass finishes, and author of CanoeCraft,
KayakCraft, and Kayaks You Can Build. Moores’ techniques are
designed to produce the clearest possible finish for fiberglass over
wood with the least amount of sanding. The goal is to saturate the
wood and fiberglass cloth and build up sufficient epoxy over the
cloth so it can be sanded smooth without cutting into the cloth—
all this without trapping air. Trapped air can cause the epoxy film to
initially appear milky, and it will also cause color changes over time
as the air bubbles are exposed to UV light. To avoid trapping air,
apply the fiberglass in three different steps, using three different
application techniques.
It takes 8 to 12 hours to apply the fiberglass to a typical canoe or
kayak. It is worth completing the job in one work session if time
allows. Each step takes 11⁄2 to 2 hours, so there are opportunities
to take a few breaks. To avoid outgassing, be certain the shop
temperature is stable before and during the procedure, especially
when applying fiberglass to the inside.
1. Gather the appropriate materials.
Fiberglass—The fiberglass cloth used is very important to
the clarity of the final finish. Some types of fiber sizing wet-
out more clearly than others. WEST SYSTEM 4 oz or 6 oz
(135g/m2 or 200g/m2) cloth, when properly wet out with
105 Resin and 207 Special Coating Hardener, becomes
almost invisible. The cloth must be rolled, never folded.
Epoxy— WEST SYSTEM 105 Resin and 207 Special Coating
Hardener produce a high gloss, slightly amber, clear finish.
Meter it with WEST SYSTEM Mini Pumps to simplify getting
an accurate ratio of resin to hardener. For best results, all
surfaces and the epoxy should be 70°F (21°C) or higher.
Application tools—Obtain a few cheap brushes with natural
bristles 2" to 3" wide. These brushes should have stiff
bristles—it may be necessary to trim them shorter to make
them stiffer. Dark bristles are better than light because they
are easier to see if they fall out of the brush. You will also
need a couple of WEST SYSTEM 808 Flexible Plastic Spreaders
and several 800 Roller Covers for fill coats.
2. Drape the dry fiberglass cloth over the hull and pull the cloth
from the ends to remove the wrinkles.
3. Apply the first coat of epoxy.
This coat should saturate the wood and fiberglass cloth but not
build up on the surface. Use a stiff bristle brush to apply the
epoxy to the cloth but do not try to work epoxy into the cloth—
just transfer the epoxy to the surface and let it soak in on its
own. Be fast and not necessarily neat with this coat. Work with
small batches of 105/207 (4 to 5 pump strokes) so you always
have freshly mixed epoxy. Apply a batch of epoxy on one side
of the boat for about 5 minutes and then the next batch on the
other side, alternating sides. This will maintain fresh epoxy at
the wet edge and will result in a much more uniform color.
Look for dry or gray areas in the fabric and apply fresh epoxy
to these spots to restore the clarity.
After the epoxy has been soaking into the cloth for about 20-30
minutes, go back and use a spreader to squeegee the surface.
Once again, do not overwork the surface. Hold the spreader
between your thumb and fingers with the beveled edge at a
very low angle to the surface. Your thumb should almost drag
on the epoxy. Move the spreader slowly from the keel
to the sheer using light pressure. Discard the excess epoxy
collected on it. Once again, look for gray or discolored areas
and add fresh epoxy to restore clarity. The spreader will clean
up runs from excess application as well as any large air
bubbles trapped under the cloth. Begin by squeegeeing the 
first area applied. Then apply the next batch before going 
back to squeegee the second batch applied. It is important 
to maintain the wet edge.
Allow the epoxy to cure to a soft, rubbery consistency.
4. Apply the second coat of epoxy.
This coat should level the texture of the fiberglass cloth so that
the last coat may be applied without introducing air. Pour the
epoxy on the surface and use a spreader to force the epoxy in
and the air out. On vertical surfaces where it is difficult to
spread the epoxy with a spreader, brush the epoxy on the lower
surface and use a spreader to pull it up. Allow the epoxy to
cure to a soft, rubbery consistency.
5. Apply the third coat of epoxy.  
This one can be rolled on with a WEST SYSTEM Roller Cover. Roll
and tip as you go.
6. Sand and finish.
When the epoxy has cured, block sand it with 150-grit paper.
Apply several coats of spar varnish, sanding with 220-grit
paper between each coat.
Figure 13-2 Dry Method of Fiberglass Application for Clear Finishing.

--- PAGE 139 ---
The Wet Method
If you are working on a vertical or overhead surface, lay
out and fit the fabric. Then roll it back on a cardboard
tube or PVC pipe for easy handling. Mix resin and
hardener, apply a coating to the substrate, and wait
until it thickens slightly. Then lay the cloth into the
epoxy, sliding it into position. Surface tension will
usually hold the cloth where you want it, but when
you are installing heavy cloth overhead, you may need
staples to prevent drooping. We find that the entire
process is much more successful when one person
holds the tube of cloth and one or two others position
it and smooth out wrinkles. As soon as the cloth is
positioned where you want it, roll on more epoxy. Wet
out the cloth completely and remove any air bubbles,
using a plastic spreader to squeegee the surface as you
would with the dry method.
With the wet method, application area is limited by time
and the number of workers. If you use a slow hardener
(WEST SYSTEM 206 or 207), you will have only about an
hour from the time you first coat the surface to complete
the procedure. This is usually adequate, but if you are
inexperienced or have problems convincing friends to
share in the fun, start with smaller areas and work up
to big surfaces as you become more capable.
An alternate wet method allows one person to apply
glass to vertical or overhead surfaces. The technique is
similar to hanging wallpaper. Cut the standard glass roll
in half. A typical roll is 60" (1500mm) wide (4 oz
glass is 50" (1250mm) wide). A 30" (750mm) wide
roll is much easier to handle. Wet out an area of the
hull with unthickened epoxy wider than the cut strip.
Cut the glass strip to length and wet it out on a protected
work surface. Roll the wet fabric onto a cardboard tube.
Position the edge of the glass against the hull. Press the
fabric against the hull and smooth it out with one hand
as you unroll it with the other. (See Figure 13-5.)
Whether you use the wet or the dry method, the point
of the squeegee process is to saturate the weave of the
cloth and then to remove any puddles of excess epoxy
which might cause the fiberglass to float from the
surface. Squeegeeing also helps to loosen air which
might be trapped in the cloth/epoxy matrix. A properly
squeegeed surface has a matte finish and its weave
should be only about two-thirds filled with epoxy.
Don’t try to fill it completely at this point—later
coatings will take care of the problem. As you work,
watch for areas of cloth that haven’t received enough
epoxy. Dry spots may be difficult to see, but they
usually look dull and slightly white. It’s especially
important to prevent them on surfaces that will be
naturally finished because the cloth will remain
visible if it is not wet out completely.
Whichever method you use, remember that the epoxy/
cloth matrix is easiest to trim when it is only partially
Chapter 13 – Synthetic Fibers and WEST SYSTEM® Epoxy
125
Figure 13-3 Applying polypropylene cloth to a 45' outrigger
hull using the wet method.
Figure 13-4 Wetting out the fiberglass cloth on a wing mast
for the 60' proa Slingshot. In this application, 4 oz cloth was
draped over the spar and wet out with rollers.

--- PAGE 140 ---
cured, 2 or 3 hours after application with fast hardener.
Excess cloth is much more difficult to cut when the
epoxy is fully cured, and it can be hard to peel it from
a surface where it is not wanted. Use a sharp blade to
cut away overhangs of epoxy-soaked cloth, keeping
the blade clean with solvent.
We usually lay cloth on one half of a hull in one opera-
tion, overlapping it a couple of inches past the keel.
An irregular overlap can cause fairing problems, so
we trim the edge of the fabric parallel to the keel before
the epoxy has cured. To do this, we hold a light batten
parallel to the keel, cut along it with a sharp knife, and
peel away the excess. Then, when we apply cloth to the
other side, we lap it 2" (50mm) past the centerline for a
total overlap of about 4" (100mm), and even it off. Trim
the edge with scissors or lay a protective strip of wood
or cardboard under the edge if using a knife. The
extra layers of cloth help to protect the keel, which
takes a good deal of abuse.
Running out of cloth and starting a new roll halfway
down the hull can cause some problems. An overlap
will create a bump, which will require filling and
sanding, but it can be hard to butt two pieces of cloth
against each other. We’ve found that the best solution
is to fit the two pieces carefully, with as little overlap as
possible, and squeegee them in place. Then, when the
epoxy is partially cured, we slice down the middle of
the overlap and, working on each side in turn, lift the
fabric from the hull, pull away the excess and replace
the fitted portion. A little more epoxy may be needed
to re-wet the surface.
You can recoat the cloth with foam rollers when the
epoxy is tacky. The first roller coating will probably not
fill the weave of the fabric completely. Allow it to cure,
then wash and sand the surface lightly with a power
sander and soft foam disc pad, taking care not to over-
sand any areas. Don’t try to achieve a totally smooth
surface—just remove the high spots so that the next
coating will flow out more evenly and less sanding will
be needed later. We usually apply two more coats of
epoxy in quick succession before final sanding, but
one is adequate in some cases. Coat the cloth heavily
enough to make sure that final sanding will not expose
any bare fiber and reduce the moisture vapor barrier
provided by WEST SYSTEM epoxy. Then coat and finish
the hull as described in Chapter 15.
Estimating Epoxy Amounts
The formula will help you estimate the amount of
mixed epoxy needed to wet out fiberglass cloth
(assuming a resin-to-fiber ration of 50:50) and apply
three rolled epoxy coats to fill the weave of the cloth,
i.e. “fill coats.”
The formula includes a waste factor of approximately
15%; however, more (or less) may be needed
depending on the job and personal application
technique. The epoxy is applied at standard room
temperature, approximately 72° F.
Gallons of mixed epoxy = 
A 3 [(Wf 3 0.00085) + 0.0075]
Where
A = Total area covered by fiberglass. Units are in square
feet (ft2)
Wf = Total weight (W) per square yard of fiberglass (f)
cloth used in laminate. Units are in ones per
square yard (oz/yd2), i.e. 6 oz fiberglass cloth
weighs 6 oz/yd2.
Note: a Group Size B resin and hardener makes 1.2 or
1.3 gal of mixed epoxy depending on hardener.
126
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 13-5 Roll up a half width piece of cloth on a section
of PVC pipe to make overhead application easier.

--- PAGE 141 ---
Applying Unidirectional Graphite Fibers
WEST SYSTEM Unidirectional Carbon Tapes are useful
in masts, rudders, centerboards, and other applications
where high strength and stiffness are necessary but
space is limited. The fibers, each one less than the
diameter of a human hair, are arranged in bundles
of about 12,000 fibers each (12K). The bundles are
stitched together, 12 bundles to an inch, for a total
of 144,000 fibers per inch of width. The fibers are
arranged and held together with stitching to make
application easier.
To prepare a surface for graphite fibers, check to see that
it is clean and apply an initial coating of WEST SYSTEM
epoxy, following instructions in Chapter 15. Before the
coating begins to cure, fill surface voids with a putty-like
mixture of epoxy and 406 Colloidal Silica and allow this
to cure. Sand filled areas flush with the surface and then
lightly sand the entire substrate. Remove the dust with
a damp cloth and rinse the rag with clean water to
guarantee that no contaminants remain to affect
adhesion. Before applying graphite to aluminum, use
a WEST SYSTEM 860 Aluminum Etch kit to prepare the
substrate. Defects and holes in aluminum may be filled
with a mixture of epoxy and 406 Colloidal Silica and
sanded, but an initial coating of epoxy is unnecessary.
Apply a liberal coating of unthickened epoxy to the
surface. This should be thick enough so that the graphite
fibers will be partially saturated when they are laid out.
Place the fibers as desired in the wet epoxy. If you are
dealing with long pieces of graphite, use a dowel as an
axle through the reel, unrolling with one hand and
positioning with the other. Apply more epoxy and lightly
work it into the fibers with a plastic spreader. Tap epoxy
in between the filaments with a stiff-bristled brush. This
process is easier if you warm the epoxy with a hair
dryer as you work, especially when working in cool
temperatures. When the graphite seems to be thoroughly
saturated, carefully inspect it, probing with a corner of
a spreader and moving the fibers very slightly.
Use a modification of this technique to bond graphite to
vertical and overhead areas. After coating, filling, and
sanding as usual, apply a second, light coat of epoxy to
the surface. Before applying the graphite tape to the
surface, wet out the fibers on a protected work surface.
Press the epoxy-covered tape into place on the surface
and run your gloved hand or a plastic spreader along
the tape with even pressure.  Apply more epoxy to
thoroughly coat the tape. For additional strength, it’s
possible to apply several layers of tape on top of each
other. In this situation, it’s best to step-taper the layers
of tape like a leaf spring, applying the longest piece first
and then successively shorter pieces. This way, you can
feather each layer when you sand it and avoid cutting
through full-length fibers.
Chapter 13 – Synthetic Fibers and WEST SYSTEM® Epoxy
127

--- PAGE 142 ---
128
Core Boatbuilding Techniques

--- PAGE 143 ---
As stated earlier in this book, Gougeon Brothers and WEST SYSTEM® epoxy have been responsible for many
innovations that have made wooden boats practical. None, however, has been more revolutionary than
hardware bonding. Hardware bonding is a method of securing fittings and fasteners to wood in a way
that greatly increases the wood’s ability to carry high point loads. From over 30 years of testing and field
experience, GBI has established a very successful hardware bonding track record—from potting loose
hinge screws, to bonding winches to decks, to helping support 150,000 pound lead keels.
Since the early 1980s, our Materials Testing Laboratory has been the world recognized authority in
hardware bonding. The lab has performed thousands of static and fatigue tests to determine the
capabilities of WEST SYSTEM epoxy in regards to hardware bonding. These tests often end when the fastener
breaks, not when it is pulled from the wood. The data from these tests show that hardware bonding is a
repeatable, predictable process, a process that allows the designer to determine in advance how a
bonded fastener will fail if it is overloaded.
Since the last edition of this book was printed, much additional information on hardware bonding has been
gathered. Many boatbuilders have adopted and advanced the techniques described in this chapter. Naval
architects are now designing boats with hardware bonding in mind—specifying adequate blocking and
orienting the grain direction to better carry the loads.
This chapter has been substantially revised for the 5th edition. We urge you to read it carefully and
completely in order to understand the principles and procedures for hardware bonding. We have
reorganized the chapter to emphasize the design process for hardware bonding, updated the
information included, provided engineering data, and specified the materials and procedures required
to do hardware bonding successfully.
Hardware installation on wooden boats presents many
problems. Even the smallest boats are usually equipped
with cleats, winches, and other fittings that must be
screwed or bolted to wood surfaces. Unfortunately,
hardware attached by normal methods reveals some
of the weaknesses of wood. While wood’s low density
makes it an ideal material for hull construction, this
low density is a weakness where hardware is concerned.
The extreme high point loadings that can be generated
by hardware can easily overstress wood fiber.
Hardware that must bear high loads is typically fastened
to deck surfaces by through-bolting. Nuts and washers
or backing plates are used on the underside of the deck
to clamp the hardware firmly to the wood surface.
Depending on the size of the washer, only a minimum
clamping load can be applied on the nut before reaching
the crush strength of the wood fiber. To keep moisture
from penetrating under the hardware and into the
vulnerable end grain exposed in the holes, various
forms of bedding compounds are used as sealants.
Sealants, however, have a disadvantage in that they are
flexible and not capable of carrying any load, leaving
fittings free to move slightly when they are stressed. For
example, fittings often have more than one bolt, and
it is impossible to drill the holes so precisely that all
the bolts will share equally in carrying the load. When
a load is applied to the fitting, first one bolt will be
stressed, and it will move slightly until another bolt
is loaded. The bolts continue to move until finally all
of them are sharing the load equally, as they were
designed to do. However, by then, the fastener holes
have elongated slightly, allowing the fitting to move
slightly each time it is stressed.
Over time, continual movement of the hardware tends
to break down the elasticity of the sealant, and this
eventually allows moisture to infiltrate the wood
immediately surrounding the hardware installation.
The invading moisture contributes to a general
Hardware Bonding
C H A P T E R
14

--- PAGE 144 ---
weakening of the wood fiber and sets up favorable
conditions for dry rot. Any leaking should be detected
early, so that the fitting can be removed and rebedded. 
High moisture levels in wood also contribute to other
problems. When wet wood swells, the wood between
the fitting and the flat washer or backing plate will
crush. When the wood dries, it shrinks, so the fitting
will be looser than ever. Wet wood also significantly
reduces holding power. Data from dozens of fastener
extraction tests show wet wood has up to 50% less
holding power than dry wood. In addition, when
moisture seeps beneath paint and varnish, it will
cause a premature failure of the finish. This often
begins at a leaking fitting. Finally, if dry rot develops,
the entire fitting may fail.
To overcome these problems, we have developed a
different approach to attaching hardware, which we
call hardware bonding.
The Concept of Hardware Bonding 
The goal of hardware bonding is to distribute loads
on fasteners and fittings over as large an area of wood
fiber as possible through adhesive bonding with WEST
SYSTEM epoxy. We use WEST SYSTEM epoxy to achieve
this load distribution bond in two distinct ways:
• Fastener Bonding. All fasteners—all screws, bolts,
and threaded rod—are bonded directly to the
surrounding wood fiber. This is particularly
effective where the fastener is stressed in tension. 
• Hardware (or Fitting) Bonding. In addition to
bonding the fasteners, the fitting itself is bonded
directly to the wood fiber on which it rests. This
is particularly effective where the fastener is stressed
in shear.
When you install hardware using the hardware bonding
techniques explained in this chapter and install deck
blocking as described in Chapter 27, the hardware can
withstand dramatically more load than hardware which
is simply through-bolted and bedded in position.
WEST SYSTEM epoxy has the capacity to bond dissimilar
materials, which makes hardware bonding practical.
WEST SYSTEM epoxy is an excellent adhesive for wood. It
can also be used to bond metal to wood. For a variety of
reasons, other types of glue typically used on wood are
not appropriate for gluing metal to wood. Additionally,
not all brands of epoxy will work. Many are too flexible;
a few are too brittle. Careful formulation of the resin
and hardener is needed to create a cured epoxy capable
of transferring the loads from metal to relatively soft,
flexible wood. WEST SYSTEM epoxy has this capability.
When a screw is inserted in wood, its threads break
the wood fiber. The screw keys into the wood. This
mechanical keying makes the screw effective, but it
does so imperfectly. Voids remain between the wood
and the metal. When the pilot hole for the screw and
the screw itself are wet out with epoxy, however, the
epoxy molds to the shape of the screw threads and
flows into all minute voids. Mechanical keying becomes
far more efficient and the screw is therefore able to bear
a greater load. The wood-epoxy matrix immediately
surrounding the fastener is stronger than wood alone,
and it distributes the fastener load more efficiently to
the surrounding wood fiber.
Basic Approaches to Hardware Bonding
Overall, hardware bonding relies on three basic
approaches.
1. Wet out a standard size pilot hole with epoxy.
The simplest and most common way to bond small
fasteners is to wet out a standard size pilot hole,
using a pipe cleaner or syringe to work epoxy
completely into the hole and all of the wood fiber
immediately surrounding it. Dab epoxy over the
screw’s shank and threads. Then insert the fastener
and allow it to cure. The bonded screw will have
much greater load capacity than an identical fastener
inserted in an identical hole without epoxy. Our tests
showed increased fastener load capacity in tension
by up to 100% on low-density woods. We gain 
this phenomenal increase with little expense or
additional effort and use it in many moderately
loaded hardware applications.
2. Cast the fastener into an oversize hole filled
with epoxy. To increase the amount of epoxy
surrounding the fastener and, therefore, its holding
power, a fastener may be inserted in an oversize
hole. This creates an annulus, or ring, of epoxy
between the metal and the wood. The diameter
of the hole may be considerably larger than the
diameter of the fastener, up to twice the diameter
of a small screw. We more typically recommend an
annulus of between 1⁄8" and 1⁄4" (3mm to 6mm) per
130
Core Boatbuilding Techniques

--- PAGE 145 ---
side, created by drilling a fastener hole with a bit
about 1⁄4" (6mm) larger in diameter than the fastener.
Drill the wood to the proper depth, fill the hole with
epoxy, coat the shank and threads of the fastener
with epoxy, and set it in.
Oversize holes and epoxy interfaces between metal
fasteners and wood fibers become increasingly
important with fasteners which are larger than 1⁄4"
in diameter. This is particularly true in situations
where the potential of a bolt, machine screw, or
threaded rod must be maximized.
3. Bond the contact surface of the fitting to wood
fiber with epoxy. Bonding the contact surface of
a fitting can contribute a great deal to load distribu-
tion over maximum wood surface. Proper bonding
of a 21⁄2" diameter pad eye, for example, can add
up to 7,000 pounds of extra shear-load resistance,
assuming Sitka spruce with the load parallel to grain.
We are primarily interested in improving the shear-
load capacity of hardware installations. It’s difficult
to make significant shear-load improvements by
bonding fasteners, but when a fitting is bonded to
the wood on which it sits, it has far more capacity
in shear than the fasteners used to attach the item
have by themselves. We bond hardware mainly to
improve shear strength, the main weakness of low-
density woods.
The Design Process for Fastener Bonding
Hardware bonding is a predictable process that allows
a designer or engineer to determine in advance how a
bonded fastener or fitting will fail if it is overloaded.
This is important because it is desirable to have
warning signs before a catastrophic failure occurs.
The information presented in this section provides
the formulas and data necessary to properly design
a wood/epoxy/metal joint whether it is stressed in
tension, shear or a combination of the two.
Fasteners Stressed Primarily in Tension
With epoxy-bonded fasteners, the idea is to balance the
three parts (fastener, epoxy, and wood/hole surface area)
to obtain optimum performance. The key information
needed is the tensile strength of the fastener, the shear
strength of the epoxy, and the withdrawal resistance of
the wood or backing block.
The fastener dimensions and tensile strength should be
available from various handbooks. We use a conserva-
tive shear strength of 800 psi for the WEST SYSTEM
105/206/404 epoxy mix. The wood performance values
are available in timber handbooks and vary by grain
direction (that is, whether the fastener is loaded parallel
or perpendicular to the grain of the wood). Typically,
one or more of the above factors is fixed, and the others
must be adjusted to fit a pre-existing condition.
As mentioned above, we typically use 800 psi as the
ultimate shear stress for the filled epoxy mix. This is
a conservative value based on long-term fatigue data.
At this stress level, the epoxy is the limiting component.
The interface between the fastener threads and the
epoxy is the typical initiation point for fatigue failure.
This is good. The fatigue failure mechanism for
epoxy—cracking and gradual destruction of the
matrix—gives some warning. A failure at the
wood/epoxy interface or the loss of the bolt head
is usually catastrophic.
The U.S. Forest Products Laboratory uses a formula to
estimate the ultimate withdrawal load for a drift bolt or
pin from the side grain of seasoned wood:
p=6,600G2DL
(p=ultimate withdrawal load in pounds, G=specific
gravity of wood @12% moisture content, D=diameter
of hole in inches, L=length of hole in inches.) 
This formula gives a good estimate of the wood’s resist-
ance to withdrawal of the epoxy plug and can be used
to determine the size of hole. The actual performance
Chapter 14 – Hardware Bonding
131
Figure 14-1 Four different bonding techniques for small
fasteners shown in cross section.
Annulus of thickened 
epoxy. Use drill bit 1⁄4"
larger than fastener size.
1⁄8"
Fastener
Wood screw
in standard
pilot hole.
Wood screw
in oversize
holes.
Machine screw
in oversize hole.
Blind threaded
rod in oversize
hole.
Hardware

--- PAGE 146 ---
may be higher than the value derived above, but we
recommend using the conservative value for estimation.
For most applications where the shear strength of the
wood is greater than 800 psi, we recommend a hole
sized 1⁄4" (6mm) larger in diameter than the major
diameter of the bolt. This gives an epoxy annulus of
1⁄8" (3mm) around the bolt. We vary the length of the
bolt and depth of the hole to balance the breaking
strength of the bolt versus the withdrawal resistance
of the epoxy plug. The 800 psi epoxy shear strength
is the limiting value. 
The following example shows how to determine the
diameter and depth of an oversize hole so that the force
required to extract the fastener is approximately equal
to the breaking strength of the bolt:
A 3⁄8" diameter 18-8 stainless-steel bolt with an ultimate
tensile strength of 85,000 psi and an effective cross-
sectional working area of 0.0775 square inches has
a breaking strength of 6,587 pounds. The hole depth
should be the breaking strength (6,600 pounds)
divided by the epoxy shear strength (800 psi), divided
by the circumference of the hole (0.625"  3.1416 =
1.9635") to equal 4.20". In actual practice, we used
a 5⁄8" diameter hole with a depth of 41⁄2" for a 3⁄8"
diameter bolt with 41⁄4" inches of bonded length.
The above calculations need to be modified when you
are limited in the depth of the hole allowed or when
a short or oversized bolt is specified in the hardware
installation. You do not want to cut away large portions
of a keel or floor by using a grossly oversized hole.
Likewise, you may be limited in a deck application by
blocking location or overhead space limitations. In such
cases, it is best to use the 1⁄4" larger diameter, epoxy-
filled hole to assist in stabilizing and securing the keel
bolt, but use floors or metal pads to distribute the load.
How the surface area of the hole affects small and large
fasteners is discussed below. 
Small fasteners in tension
In 1978 and 1979, we conducted tests to determine
the relative effects of surface area on fasteners. We
compared tension withdrawal of 11⁄2" long flathead
wood screws, ranging in size from No. 8 through No.
14, in dry pilot holes and oversize holes from 3⁄16" to 3⁄4"
in diameter. The screws were buried in 1⁄4" plywood
and Sitka spruce samples which had been constructed
to simulate a deck and blocking. All of the screws,
from No. 8 through No. 14, had about the same load
capacity when they were bonded in 1⁄4" diameter
holes—approximately 1700 pounds. At this load,
the fastener/epoxy plug pulled out of the wood. Larger
diameter holes often resulted in a tension failure of
the fastener.
Large fasteners in tension
Failure mode for 3⁄4" diameter and larger fasteners can
also be controlled by varying the surface area of the
hole. Withdrawal resistance is affected by a number of
variables, including fastener aspect ratio, length, and
shape. Therefore the figures given here should serve
only as general guides. Depending on the number of
load cycles, R ratio, and other variables, safe allowable
design loads should not exceed 1⁄2 of the ultimate
withdrawal resistance loads.
In 2002, our Materials Test Laboratory tested some
large fasteners potted in epoxy as part of Lloyd’s
Register certification for a 154' wood/epoxy sailboat
project built by Hodgdon Yachts. There were two test
programs, one with 3⁄4" diameter stainless steel threaded
rod and another with 11⁄2" diameter silicon bronze bolts.
All fasteners were bonded into laminated 3⁄4" clear
Douglas fir. Figure 14-3 shows how the bolt was
oriented relative to the grain of the wood. The annulus
was 1⁄16" per side, as specified for the 3⁄4" bolts—smaller
132
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 14-2 Typical screw types.
Flathead machine screw
Self-tapping sheet metal screw
Flathead wood screw

--- PAGE 147 ---
than we would have normally recommended. Two of
the rods were imbedded 5" deep and five rods were
imbedded 6" deep. It took an average of 19,400 pounds
of force to remove the 3⁄4"  5" embed and 22,000
pounds to remove the 3⁄4"  6" embedded threaded rods.
An interesting note: Based on the pull-out value of
Douglas fir and the shear strength of the epoxy, if we
had embedded the 3⁄4" threaded rod 7" instead of 6",
the likelihood is that the bolt would have broken
instead of pulling out of the block of wood.
Additionally, Lloyd’s Register requested two more tests
on the much larger 11⁄2" silicon bronze fasteners that
would be used to hold the propeller strut to the bottom
of the hull. These test fasteners were bonded into much
larger laminated wood blocks. The wood grain is
oriented differently in this test than in the 3⁄4" rod test
to reflect the way the grain is oriented in the hull of the
boat, as shown in Figure 14-4. The annulus for the 11⁄2"
bolts was 1⁄8" per side. 55,000 pounds was required to
remove the 11⁄2"  9" embedded silicon bronze rods.
The force required, in pounds per square inch of hole
surface area, ranged from 1,000 to 1,600 psi depending
on the properties of the wood used to laminate the test
blocks. These numbers correspond favorably to the
conservative 800 psi we recommended above for
fasteners that will be used in fatigue applications.
While our results show that bonding significantly
increases the capacity of fasteners, they should not be
interpreted to mean that small fasteners can be substi-
tuted for larger ones in any given application. Instead,
the techniques described in this chapter can be used
to increase safety margins and increase resistance to
damage from dry rot.
Fasteners Stressed Primarily in Shear
Hardware items are loaded in shear more often than
they are loaded in direct tension, so we think an under-
standing of the shear capacity of fasteners is a critical
part of hardware bonding. We conducted numerous
shear tests on various types and sizes of fasteners to
determine their capability under various load conditions.
Most fasteners have less capacity in shear than in straight
tension. In part, this is because fasteners tend to bend
under shear load. This bending causes extremely high
point loading, which begins at the upper wood surface
immediately surrounding the fastener head and works
down the shank as the fastener bends. To complicate
the problem, the crush value for wood is way below
what would be needed to withstand the high point
loading generated by the bending fastener. Bonding a
fastener in an epoxy/wood matrix will improve shear
load capacity, but not as dramatically as it increases
tension withdrawal. While an oversize hole with the
epoxy matrix surrounding the fastener distributes load
over more area, the extreme high point loading caused
by the bending fastener can reach the compressive
capability of the epoxy itself.
Chapter 14 – Hardware Bonding
133
Figure 14-3 The 3⁄4" test samples before testing (left) and a
cutaway of the damage after testing (right). Threaded rods
were imbedded parallel to the glue joints.
Figure 14-4 The 112" test samples before testing (left) and
a cutaway of the damage after testing (right). The 112" silicon
bronze threaded rods were imbedded perpendicular to the
glue joints.

--- PAGE 148 ---
When fasteners are tested in tension, failure is easy to
detect. When they are tested in shear, however, it is
more difficult to determine when failure has occurred.
We have a long-established rule that fittings should not
move under normal maximum load. For us, fastener
failure is detectable movement. Shear tests are difficult
to design, however, and we could not use measure-
ments of fastener movement as reliable indicators of
failure. Instead, we used four measurement criteria,
of which maximum load to detectable movement and
maximum load with movement not to exceed a pencil
line (.030") were the most important. In our tests,
larger diameter fasteners proved superior to smaller
diameter fasteners in shear resistance, as might be
expected. With wood screws, the value at detectable
movement for a No. 8 screw was 435 pounds, while
the value for a No. 14 screw increased only to 696
pounds. The increase between the two is not as large
as the increase with standard size pilot holes in tension
withdrawal testing.
Fastener type
Fastener type made a difference in performance. Self-
tapping and machine screws were generally superior
to wood screws for shear load resistance, but tapping
screws tended to have a lower ultimate breaking strength
than wood screws.
High ultimate load capacity is good because of the
generous safety margin it provides. Since we consider
any movement to be initial failure, with a high proba-
bility that ultimate failure will follow in a period of
time, our solution is to provide an appropriate safety
margin. In selecting fasteners to secure a fitting, we
therefore opt for either larger tapping screws or a
greater number of tapping screws.
Machine screws have a distinct advantage as load-
bearing fasteners because of their high initial resistance
to movement and high ultimate failure capacity. This
increased capacity is due to their larger core diameter
and their fully threaded shank. Since machine screws
also exhibited excellent tension withdrawal resistance,
we think that for many applications they have the most
potential. We use machine screws just as we would
wood screws or self-tapping screws. The only difference
is that machine screws have blunt ends and, therefore,
cannot cut their own holes. You must drill pilot holes
with the right diameter drill bit and to the proper
depth.
Self-tapping screws are our second choice of fasteners.
They are usually superior to wood screws in tension
withdrawal. Wood screws, which were developed
primarily for use in attaching two pieces of wood,
seem to be superior only in ultimate failure in shear,
and this is of little consolation after large movement
has occurred. They appear to have no significant advan-
tage as fasteners for attaching hardware to wood. Wood
screws are probably adequate for most hardware appli-
cations, but we see no reason to use them when tapping
and machine screws are available at comparable prices.
134
Core Boatbuilding Techniques
Figure 14-5 Cross section view of a test sample demon-
strating shear load on a fastener.
Figure 14-6 Cross section view of failure modes for shear on
self-tapping screws and flathead machine screws.
Zinc plated flathead
machine screw
Stainless
steel tang
Load
Spruce block with
plywood deck
Epoxy filled
oversize hole
Plywood
Tang
Head sheared at tang
Spruce
Flat head
machine
screw
Wood crushed
Separation of screw from
epoxy
Epoxy
crushed
into wood

--- PAGE 149 ---
As a rule, flathead screws are preferable to roundhead
screws. This is especially significant when screws are
loaded in shear, where tight mating with the hardware
is critical to preventing hardware movement. A round-
head fastener inevitably has some slop between the
fastener shank and the hardware hole through which it
passes. While this gap can be partially filled with epoxy,
this is not as strong as a tight metal-to-metal fit. If the
holes in a fitting are not countersunk for a flathead
fastener, you can usually taper them with a screw
countersink or grind special bits to the 