of its
natural weaknesses. Epoxy in combination with wood accentuates the positive properties and reduces the
weaknesses.
This book, as originally written, set out an emerging technology that shared many of the traditional uses and
choices of wood in boatbuilding. In some areas, we departed from these traditions—we suggest more use of
softwoods or less rot-resistant species, and we suggest construction techniques optimized for gluing rather
than fastening.
Much has changed in the world of wood over the twenty-five years since this book was originally published.
The population of the world has increased from 4.3 to 6.3 billion. That increased population has stressed the
traditional sources of supply and made environmental consciousness, once an individual choice, now influen-
tial in broad areas of public policy around the world. Deforestation, reforestation, national forest products
policies, tree plantations, forest monocultures, and biodiversity are important issues that influence the choice,
availability, and price of many wood species. 
At the same time, the general populace has become much less knowledgeable about wood. Boat manufac-
turers advertise their products as “wood-free,” ignorant of how to use the material properties of wood to
their advantage. 
This chapter provides a primer on how to consider the fundamental properties of wood as an engineering
material, irrespective of species. Wood/epoxy composite construction allows for broad substitution of wood
species based on balancing density, strength, and price. You can use less durable woods (if their other
mechanical properties are important to you) by addressing the durability issue in a different fashion. Consider
how broadly balsa is used in modern boatbuilding—unthinkable forty or fifty years ago. Encapsulated in a
properly fabricated plastic composite, balsa has advantageous properties. 
If you find it difficult to obtain certain kinds of wood, be bold and substitute. But do your homework and make
test samples to prove to yourself the viability of these alternative species and how you may introduce them
into your project. Some quite extraordinary boats have been built out of non-traditional boatbuilding species. 
Wood as a Structural Material
C H A P T E R
3

--- PAGE 26 ---
Wood has many advantages as a boatbuilding material.
It’s probably easier, less expensive, and more satisfying
to build a boat from wood than from any other material.
Wood is relatively easy to cut and shape and almost
everyone has some experience with it. It’s satisfying to
work with because it’s beautiful. Wood is readily avail-
able and it costs less than steel, aluminum, or fiberglass.
Although lumber prices have increased, wood is still
comparatively inexpensive in terms of both its own
cost and the cost of tools to work it. Most importantly,
however, wood has physical characteristics that make it
ideal for boatbuilding. Its strength, stiffness, light weight,
and resistance to fatigue give wood advantages over
other materials.
While wood has many advantages as a structural ma-
terial, it also has some well-known disadvantages, most
of which are caused by the passage of water in and out
of its cells. Wood can rot. It shrinks and swells with
changes in moisture and temperature, and it loses some
of its strength and stiffness when its moisture content
is high. In the past, difficulties arose in constructing
boats with wood because of changes in the condition
of the wood caused by variations in moisture content.
As its moisture level increases, the wood changes in
dimension and loses some of its strength and stiffness.
The design of boats built of wood had to make allow-
ances for this instability.
To a very great extent, the use of WEST SYSTEM Brand
epoxy overcomes the problems previously associated
with wood construction. All joints in boats built with
the methods described in this book are bonded with,
and all surfaces encapsulated in, epoxy. In this way,
every piece of wood, inside and out, is covered with a
barrier coating of WEST SYSTEM epoxy through which no
significant amount of water or air can pass. As a result,
the moisture content of the wood is stabilized.
This stabilization means that the wood will shrink and
swell very little. The moisture level at which the stabi-
lization occurs and at which the wood remains ensures
a continuation of design strength and stiffness. Encap-
sulation in WEST SYSTEM epoxy also prevents dry rot,
not only by stabilizing moisture content, but also by
restricting oxygen supply to the wood surface.
Since World War II, there has been tremendous
research and development in the field of epoxy and
other thermosetting plastics. Wood research had focused
on technologies and products suited to the construction
industry. We are among the few to work specifically to
develop a wood/epoxy composite material and the only
group to test it exhaustively, especially in high-cycle
fatigue. Our efforts clearly show that a wood/WEST
SYSTEM epoxy composite is one of the best structural
materials currently available for building boats when
strength and stiffness-to-weight are primary considera-
tions. Because of the superiority of the composite in
fatigue, wood/epoxy hulls are less liable to failure over
time and after hard use than hulls built of other ma-
terials. We will explain why this is so in this chapter
and discuss WEST SYSTEM epoxy in greater detail
in Chapter 4. See Appendix B for additional data on
wood’s mechanical properties.
Engineering for Wooden Boats
Boats present unique engineering problems. They
require an outer skin, which may or may not be load-
bearing, but which must withstand and deflect tons
of water. Boats must also survive the kind of high
point loads that occur during launching and hauling
out, or if objects are struck at sea. Even small vessels
have tremendous amounts of vulnerable hull and deck
surface which must be properly supported to retain
their streamlined shapes. Large sailing rigs may cause
torsion and bending in hulls that have inadequate shear
bracing. Finally, boats must survive these loads continu-
ously over many years. The overall task in addressing
these problems is the successful integration of proper
design, construction methods, and material choices.
Boats demand a material that is strong and lightweight.
It must also be stiff, as demonstrated by the ability to
resist deformation under load. Within certain limits, the
lighter and stiffer a boat is, the better its potential for
performance and durability. The less a hull weighs, the
faster it will move under a given amount of power. The
stiffer a boat, the better it holds its true shape and resists
“softening” or weakening through flex and fatigue. Boat-
building materials must retain their strength and stiffness
over time and after use, and the boat’s structural compo-
nents and construction method must be designed to fully
exploit the materials’ capabilities.
These principles may be best understood by thinking of
a boat hull as a box beam enclosed by hull planking,
12
Fundamentals of Wood/Epoxy Composite Boatbuilding

--- PAGE 27 ---
deck planking, and keel. This total outer skin, plus the
stringers and other longitudinal members, provides
support fore and aft. Frames and bulkheads, at right
angles to these, form a strengthening lattice athwart-
ships and provide torsional rigidity. If this lattice is
loose and weak and its skin flexible from poor design,
bad construction, or inappropriate choice of materials,
the entire beam may lose its shape. In boats, problems
of inadequate support most commonly show up as
hogging, sagging, leaking, and slow performance.
Adequate structural strength is required of any material
used in boats. Usually, enough material is used to
provide an adequate safety margin against material
fatigue and unforeseen loads; beyond this basic require-
ment, ultimate strength is less critical. Stiffness,
however, continues to be important, and maximum
stiffness is very desirable. All materials must deflect—
either stretch or compress—under load, but usually
any deformation in a boat’s hull shape is undesirable.
While both strength and stiffness can generally be
increased by using more material in the form of a
thicker hull skin, this will increase hull weight. A basic
problem with boats is that skin weight alone becomes
the major factor in overall boat weight.
In the quest for more speed, reducing weight is of major
importance. Materials have been pushed to their limits
for many years. Recently, strong competition and the
desires of clients have caused many designers and
builders to go further and to sometimes test margins
of safety. The results of this—boats that never finish
races because of materials failure—point to the impor-
tance of fatigue resistance in any boatbuilding material.
When a material loses most of its strength after a single
high loading, it may quickly fail, no matter how strong
it was originally.
Fatigue is an accumulation of damage caused by
repeated loading of a structure. When boats, wind
turbine blades, and masts are subjected to a continuing
series of loads, the fatigue behavior of the material of
which they are made is more important than its
ultimate one-time strength. If a boatbuilding material
loses most of its strength after a few thousand hours of
service, it may fail. Failure in fatigue is probably one of
the leading causes of breakdowns in racing boats.
Materials differ widely in their resistance to fatigue.
Some are very strong for a limited number of loads but
lose a high percentage of this strength as the loads are
repeated. Others, particularly wood, begin with slightly
lower one-time load strengths but retain most of their
capabilities even after millions of cycles of tension and
compression. One-time, load-to-failure figures may not,
therefore, be very representative of how a material
behaves under long-term cyclic fatigue stress.
Figure 3-1 illustrates the cyclic tension fatigue behavior
of some popular boatbuilding materials. The left side
of this chart displays the load capability of each material
expressed as a percentage, with 100% representing
the ultimate one-time strength of each. All of these
materials lose strength as a given load is repeated at
steadily increasing numbers of cycles. The plotted
fatigue curves show the relative percentages of strength
which remain after any given range of loads and cycles
to failure.
Millions of cycles of stress are difficult to imagine, but
they can be translated into operating hours. Boats at sea
have been carefully instrumented where cyclic load
increases associated with waves were measured once
every 3 seconds. At this rate, after about 833 hours,
the equivalent of about four years of seasonal weekend
sailing, a hull would experience about a million cycles.
The material used in a wooden boat would at this time
still have about 60% of its ultimate strength, while
aluminum would retain 40% and fiberglass composite
20% of their respective ultimate capabilities. Given the
anticipated life of a hull and the fact that human lives
depend on its strength over time, these figures deserve
serious consideration.
Chapter 3 – Wood as a Structural Material
13
Figure 3-1 Tensile fatigue comparison. Fatigue strength of
various structural materials as a percentage of static strength.

--- PAGE 28 ---
Some boat designers set their priorities and trade off
between stiffness, one-time strength, weight, and resist-
ance to fatigue. We use wood, so we don’t have to
compromise. It is the material of choice when the
primary goal is to gain maximum stiffness and excellent
strength and at least weight, and wood will retain these
qualities for many years of hard sailing. 
Wood Strength 
In The New Science of Strong Materials, J. E. Gordon
suggests that a simple way to understand the strength
of wood is to think of a bundle of drinking straws which
have been glued together. These represent tubular cellu-
lose fibers bonded with lignin and clearly illustrate what
happens to a piece of wood under load. 
When equal tension and compression loads are applied
to opposing faces of this bundle, effects differ. The
bundle is anisotropic: longitudinal strength, with the
grain of the straws, is much greater than horizontal or
cross-grain strength. When too much compression is
applied to any face, the straws buckle and then crush.
The bundle is generally stronger in tension than in
compression, but in spite of all this pushing and
pulling, the straws are very hard to actually break. 
Strength is a measurement of the amount of force
needed to break something. In wood, strength values
vary significantly according to the orientation and type
of load. Mechanical properties are about 20 times higher
in the direction of grain than across it, either parallel
to or at right angles to the growth rings. Tensile strength
of most wood is quite high and compressive strength
somewhat lower. When it is overloaded, wood will
buckle and crush, with cells deforming up to 20%
before initial failure. It will then gradually yield before
finally breaking.
The strength of any particular piece of wood is greatly
dependent on its quality, moisture content, and density.
Grain irregularities, knots, and other defects may cause
local weakness. Variation in moisture content may
increase or reduce the ultimate strength of an entire
board. Figure 3-10 illustrates how changes in levels of
moisture affect wood’s ultimate mechanical properties,
especially in compression. Wood density varies from
species to species. See Appendix B for a listing of
the ultimate static mechanical properties of selected
boatbuilding woods.
Wood has unusually good resistance to fatigue.
Although its one-time load capability may not be as
high as that of other materials, a significantly high
percentage of it is available for long-term fatigue life.
This is not surprising when we consider that nature
spent millions of years evolving trees in a competitive
environment. But while this capability was empirically
proven for years—anyone who watches a tall old tree
survive repeated winds knows that wood is strong over
time—little specific design data was available to
support engineering efforts for repetitively loaded
wooden structures.
Laminated veneer testing
In 1978, with the sponsorship of NASA, we began
a program to determine the fatigue characteristics
of wood in laminate form. Earlier fatigue testing,
performed in 1943, showed that Sitka spruce exhibits
excellent fatigue behavior, but failed to provide enough
specific information for us to develop design allowables
14
Fundamentals of Wood/Epoxy Composite Boatbuilding
Figure 3-2 This Douglas fir laminate augmented with carbon
fiber failed in compression at about 20,000 psi.

--- PAGE 29 ---
for our wind turbine blades. Our tests, which are
described more fully in Appendix C, centered on ultra-
sonically-graded Douglas fir veneers laminated with
WEST SYSTEM epoxy, with and without synthetic fiber
augmentation. The discussion of our results which
follows is limited to wood/epoxy composites; details
about other laminates made with wood and glass
aramid and graphite fiber reinforcement are provided
in Appendix C. No similar comprehensive data exist
for solid timber, but values are usually lower.
Figure 3-3 shows the resulting fatigue curves in tension,
compression, and reverse axial tension to compression.
Wood is considerably stronger in tension than in
compression at low load cycles. At ten million cycles,
however, their capabilities are very similar and the
two fatigue curves move closer together.
We have designed blades for wind turbines up to 400'
(121m) in diameter and built blades that are 651⁄2'
(20m) long. Veneers are only 8'(2400mm) long and 
must be joined in some fashion in order to build larger
rotors. For this reason, all of our test samples have
included either staggered butt or scarf joints—built-in
manufacturing defects. In one group of tests, we used a
12-to-1 slope scarf joint between mating veneers and
in a second series we induced the much more serious
flaw of three butted joints. While the difference
between the scarfed and butted specimens, logarithmi-
cally plotted in Figures 3-4 and 3-5, was significant, it
was much less than we anticipated. In any other
material, this type of induced defect would likely cause
a much more significant reduction in fatigue capability.
These were tests for longitudinal mechanical properties,
measuring fatigue when loads were applied parallel to 
the grain of the wood. Just as important are secondary
properties or cross-grain material capability. Trees have
very simple load paths, with most loads longitudinal 
to wood grain direction, but boats and other complex
structures do not. In these, loads will vary from fiber
direction, so some understanding of a material’s ability
to carry loads radially and tangentially is needed for safe
design.
All unidirectional composites exhibit substantially less
strength across their fibers than parallel to them. Wood
laminates are generally about five times stronger in
tension parallel to the fiber direction than tangentially
to the fiber direction. Dense high-strength fiber bundles
such as glass or carbon have a much worse problem in
this regard: their cross-fiber strength may only be a very
small fraction of longitudinal capability. It is our view
that a majority of composite material failures in the
marine field are in these secondary properties, and it is
also in these areas where limited or no fatigue data exist.
Chapter 3 – Wood as a Structural Material
15
Figure 3-3 Laminate fatigue properties. Maximum strength
adjusted to 12% wood moisture content vs. total cycles for
BG-1 Douglas fir/epoxy laminate with 12:1 slope scarf joints
with 3" stagger, 31.8 in3 test volume, parallel to grain load
direction, at room temperature.
Figure 3-4 Compression fatigue. Maximum stress vs. total
cycles for Douglas fir/epoxy laminate with 12:1 slope scarf
and butt joints with 3" stagger, 31.8 in3 test volume, parallel
to grain direction, room temperature and 12% wood moisture
content.

--- PAGE 30 ---
Size effect in laminated veneer
During the second half of the 1980s, The U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy funded an extensive GBI test program
to investigate various properties of epoxy/Douglas fir
veneer laminate. The research included static and fatigue
measurements of two secondary properties: (1) radial
cross-grain tensile strength and (2) rolling shear strength.
Radial refers to the through-the-thickness dimension,
perpendicular to the plane of lamination. Radial tensile
stress tends to pull the veneer layers apart. Rolling
shear refers to the application of opposing forces,
parallel to the plane of lamination but perpendicular
to the wood fibers. The opposing forces are slightly
offset to generate shear, such that wood fibers in
adjacent slip planes have a tendency to twist and roll
over each other.
Both secondary property studies featured two popula-
tions of test specimens made from the same parent
laminate, one with small-volume specimens and one
with large-volume specimens, in order to gauge size
effect. Size effect refers to the often-overlooked phe-
nomenon that causes physically small test specimens to
demonstrate unrealistically high strength with respect
to that of actual, real world structures made from the
same material.
The test sections of the 28 small radial cross-grain ten-
sion specimens were 1.5" in the grain direction, 0.5"
wide and 2.0" (20 veneer layers) thick. The test sections
of the 35 large radial cross-grain tension specimens
were 6.0" in the grain direction, 4.0" wide, and 12.0"
(120 veneer layers) thick. The large/small specimen
volume ratio was therefore 192:1. The average cross-
grain tensile strength of the small-volume specimens
was 393 psi. The average static strength of the large-
volume specimens was only 280 psi, a knockdown of
about 29%. The laminate moisture content of both
specimen populations was the same, ranging from 5 to
6%. In fatigue, the size effect turned out to be much
more pronounced. The S-N (Stress-Number of cycles to
failure) curves showed that for R = 0.1, the small speci-
mens could reach 10 million cycles with a peak stress
of 275 psi. (R is the ratio of the minimum stress
divided by the maximum stress. A ratio of 0.1 means
the maximum stress is 10 times the minimum.) For 
the large-volume specimens, the S-N slope was much
steeper. A typical large-volume specimen could reach 10
million cycles only if the peak stress was 134 psi or less.
This was convincing evidence that size effect should
determine the design allowables for large, fatigue-driven
wood structures.
As for rolling shear, the specimen stressed volume ratio
was 160 in3 vs. 2.5 in3, or 64:1. There were 29 small-
volume specimens and 14 large-volume specimens,
all made from the same parent material. The laminate
moisture content was just over 6%. The rolling shear
16
Fundamentals of Wood/Epoxy Composite Boatbuilding
Figure 3-6 Tangential fatigue, wood/epoxy laminate.
Figure 3-5 Tension fatigue. Maximum stress vs. total cycles
for Douglas fir/epoxy laminate with 12:1 slope scarf and butt
joints with 3" stagger, 31.8 in3 test volume, parallel to grain
direction, room temperature and 12% wood moisture content.

--- PAGE 31 ---
static strength of the small-volume specimens averaged
276 psi. The rolling shear strength of the large-volume
specimens averaged 268 psi. In this case, the size effect
appeared to be insignificant. The knockdown for the
larger volume amounted to only about 3%. However,
the size effect was bigger in fatigue. The small-volume
specimens intercepted the one million R = 0.1 cycle line
at 185.5 psi. The large-volume specimens intercepted
the one million-cycle line at only 152.2 psi. An investiga-
tive technique that relied only on static testing would
have missed this important truth. With the so-called
secondary properties, size effect becomes increasingly
severe as cycle counts rise.
Wood Stiffness
Stiffness may be quantified by measuring deflection
under a given load. It describes how floppy, flexible,
rigid, or stiff a material or structure is. Since repeated
deflection can cause cumulative damage, resistance to
deflection is often important to the integrity of rigid
structures. In boats, adequate hull stiffness prevents the
excessive working which may result from repeated high-
point loadings. Wood has excellent stiffness potential
and, as indicated in Figure 3-7, it is relatively light in
weight.
To illustrate wood stiffness, we conducted a simple
bending test and compared it to other materials used
in boat construction. For this experiment, we made
up samples of the following:
l. Unidirectional glass fiber with polyester resin
(50% fiber volume).
2. Aluminum (5054-H34 commercial grade).
3. Kevlar™ aramid fiber with epoxy (50% fiber).
4. Graphite fiber with epoxy (50% fiber).
5. White ash.
6. Sitka spruce.
7. Western red cedar.
Each sample was 24" long  1⁄2" wide. Thickness was
determined by the density of each material so that all
samples weighed exactly 25 grams. In theory, the
samples represent small sections of a hull skin taken
from boats of the equal size and weight manufactured
with each of these materials.
To test our samples, we clamped them to a bench and
used them as cantilever beams, with weights hung from
their free ends. Figure 3-8 lists the amount of deflection
measured under uniform weight in all samples, and it
also lists the price per pound of each material. Wood
and graphite fiber/epoxy composite clearly resisted
deflection better than the others. When cost is factored
in, wood is the winner of the stiffness test. Graphite fiber
composite is almost twenty times (1985) as expensive
as Sitka spruce. 
The beam test compares equal weights of materials, but
not equal volumes. A section of 1⁄8" aluminum would
resist deflection far better than a piece of wood with
the same dimensions, but it would also weigh about
seven times as much. Two hulls, one made of 1⁄8"
aluminum and the other of 7⁄8" wood, would weigh
about the same, but the wooden hull would be
significantly stiffer.
Chapter 3 – Wood as a Structural Material
17
Figure 3-7 Relative weights of flat panels built with various
structural materials. Wood/epoxy composite built with ultra-
sonically graded Douglas fir and WEST SYSTEM epoxy.

--- PAGE 32 ---
When weight is a major consideration, as it is in boat
hulls, there are advantages to choosing low rather than
high-density materials to generate stiffness. On a weight
per square foot basis, a thicker, lighter material has a
natural advantage over a thinner, heavier one. In a beam,
longitudinal stresses are better carried as far as possible
from the neutral axis, provided that the loads do not
exceed material strength. A wooden beam may be thicker
than a steel one for the same weight and may also offer
some thermal and acoustic insulation. It is only in areas
where space is limited and strength requirements are
high that strong, high-density materials become prefer-
able. Masts, booms, and centerboards may require more
strength in smaller dimensions than unreinforced wood
can offer.
Our test does not reflect the fact that both the strength
and stiffness of glass-reinforced composites may be
manipulated with the use of core materials. The
technique of bonding skins of fiberglass over wood
is enormously successful for small boats, most notably
stripper canoes, as we will discuss more fully in
Chapter 23.
Trees into Lumber
To understand wood as a structural material, it’s neces-
sary to know a little about its growth. While certain
of its properties, most notably resistance to repeated
buffeting of wind and water, stem from its functions
in supporting and feeding the tree, some of wood’s
problems also result from its original role in life.
As a tree grows, cellulose molecules are organized into
strands, and these become parts of the cell walls of
wood fiber. Cellulose, lignin, and hemicellulose give
wood its physical properties. New wood is laid around
a core of older wood and pith and reflects the growing
seasons in which it was made. Early wood cells, pro-
duced in the spring, may have thinner walls and larger
cavities than latewood cells. The transition between the
two is visually apparent in annual growth rings, which
vary in size by tree species and by the general condi-
tions in which the tree grew. In areas like the tropics,
where trees grow year round, distinct rings do not
appear. By contrast, trees that grow in northern climates,
where seasonal changes are extreme, have distinct rings
of early and late woods.
Two kinds of wood develop in the tree trunk. Sapwood
or xylem, recently formed, stores food and transports
sap. When a tree has grown so large that its innermost
sapwood is no longer close to the cambium, its cells
undergo chemical and physical change to become heart-
wood. Material deposited in heartwood cells may make
it darker than sapwood in color and usually increase its
durability.
The terms hardwood and softwood describe neither
strength nor toughness. Softwood trees bear cones and,
18
Fundamentals of Wood/Epoxy Composite Boatbuilding
Deflection in inches
with 200
with 500
Pounds
gram
gram
Specific
per cubic 
Cost per
Materials2
weight
weight
gravity
foot
pound3
Glass fiber/polyester (50% fiber volume)
10
Failed
1.52
104
$ 2.58
Aluminum (5054-H34 sheet)
91⁄2
Failed
2.7
170
$ 2.50
Kevlar™/epoxy (50% fiber volume)
61⁄4
111⁄2
1.18
81
$ 10.45
Graphite fiber/epoxy (50% fiber volume)
111⁄16
4
1.54
105
$ 24.40
White ash (select)
111⁄16
4
.64
42
$
.77
Sitka spruce (select)
13⁄16
113⁄16
.38
26
$ 1.48
Western red cedar (select)
11⁄16
15⁄8
.31
21
$ 1.63
1Test conducted by Gougeon Brothers. August 1976.
2All samples weigh 25 grams and measure 24-inches  1/2-inch.
3Prices as of September 1985.
Figure 3-8 Stiffness comparison of cantilever beams made of seven different engineering materials.

--- PAGE 33 ---
often, needle-like leaves. Hardwoods may be evergreen
or deciduous; it is their broad leaves that distinguish
them from softwoods. Both types of trees have fibers
or tracheids, long, pointed cells which serve as their
basic support. In hardwoods, sap flows through a
system of vessels. Softwoods rely on thin walled tra-
cheids laid down early in the year for controlling sap
and on thicker-walled, later tracheids for support. Sap
is carried horizontally from pith to bark in hardwoods
and softwoods by cellular structures called rays.
The majority of fibers in any standing tree are aligned
vertically. When the log is cut up into boards, the length
of the board is always parallel—or nearly so—to the
fibers, or with the grain of the wood. Straightness of
grain varies from species to species, but grain is usually
straighter in heartwood and in sapwood than in pith,
where the fibers are burled. Rays are twined through
the fibers perpendicularly and are aligned more or less
along the radius. Looking at the end of a log, the wood
rays may appear like spokes of a wheel.
Some species—Sitka spruce is probably the most
extreme example—have abundant wood rays and
therefore do not split easily along the grain. They
are said to have a great deal of grain strength. Other
species, such as redwood and Western red cedar,
have few rays and therefore split easily.
The rate at which a tree grows varies according to its
species and within the species, depending on soil
conditions and the weather at the spot where it is
growing. We have seen Sitka spruce with as few as
eight growth rings per radial inch, indicating that the
tree from which it came grew in diameter at the rate of
1⁄4" (6mm) per year. We have also seen wood with as
many as 30 growth rings per inch, indicating that the
tree from which it came had increased its diameter at the
rate of only 1⁄15" (1.7mm) per season. Slow-growing
trees, which have a higher number of growth rings per
inch, have a higher percentage of late wood than faster-
growing trees. For this reason, lumber from slow-growing
trees is usually heavier and stronger.
Harvested wood is processed in many ways for paper,
chemicals, and lumber. Boatbuilders are concerned with
the techniques used to manufacture planks and plywood
veneers. In each of these, two distinctly different methods
are used, and in each case, one is preferable for wood
used in boat construction.
Boards may be cut from the log in two ways. In plain or
slab sawn lumber, all cuts are parallel and annual rings
are at angles of 0° to 45° with the wide side of a board.
Quarter or radial sawn boards, on the other hand, are
cut with growth rings at angles of 45° to 90° to their
wide sides, and so are approximately parallel to the
tree’s rays. Although these distinctions may be a bit
confused by the terminology of the marketplace—plain
sawn softwoods may be called flat or slash grained and
quarter sawn softwoods may be advertised as edge or
vertical grained—they are significant.
Plywood is made of layers or plies of thin veneer glued
together so that the grain of each layer is at right angles
to the grain of the plies on either side of it. The veneers
themselves may be either peeled or sliced from the log.
In the rotary-cutting or peeling operation, knives “un-
wind” a continuous length of wood until perhaps six
inches of the original log remain. Sliced veneers, less
common, are made by first sawing the log into quarters
or eighths, and then slicing it into thin strips with a
straight knife.
Wood and Moisture
Freshly-cut wood, however sawn, has two major prob-
lems. Heartwood, sapwood, early wood, and latewood,
all of which may have slightly different densities and
properties, may appear in the same plank. High moisture
content, distributed unevenly between heartwood and
sapwood, compounds what might not otherwise be a
significant difficulty and creates its own set of troubles
for the boatbuilder. Wood derives its strength from
cellulose, lignin, and hemicellulose, and some of its
greatest weaknesses from its other major component,
water.
The moisture content of trees and wood is expressed as
a percentage of the weight of the wood after it has been
dried in an oven. In a living tree, where water and water
vapor occupy cell cavities and are held in cell walls,
moisture content can range from 30% to 200%. In soft-
woods especially, heartwood and sapwood of the same
tree usually contain different levels of water. In Western
red cedar, an extreme example, sapwood holds almost
Chapter 3 – Wood as a Structural Material
19

--- PAGE 34 ---
five times as much water as heartwood. While sapwood
is generally “wetter” than heartwood, in some trees, such
as birch, oak, and tupelo, the opposite is the case.
When a tree is cut, its wood is green. Moisture remains in
cell cavities and walls. As water and sap are dispelled, the
wood reaches its fiber saturation point: cell walls are
still saturated but cell cavities have dried out. At this
time, moisture content is between 25% and 30% of dry
weight. Wood is dimensionally stable above its satura-
tion point but not below it.
Wood continues to lose water until it reaches equilib-
rium moisture content at which it neither gains nor loses
water. Cell walls dry out, stiffen, and shrink until their
moisture content is in balance with the temperature and
relative humidity of their environment. Wood continu-
ously seeks this equilibrium as long as it is exposed to
fluctuations in the atmosphere. Every day, as tempera-
tures and humidity change, unprotected wood absorbs
and releases water vapor to maintain equilibrium
moisture content. Constant contraction and expansion
cycles over time lead to fiber deterioration.
Heartwood and sapwood begin with different moisture
contents and therefore reach fiber saturation and equili-
brium points at different times. As lumber shrinks during
cure, its cells tend to pull at each other and become taut.
This has the desired effect of stiffening the board, but if
heartwood dries up and stiffens long before sapwood in
the same plank does, the inconsistent drying rates may
set up excessive internal stressing which results in warp-
ing, checking, cracks, and grain rise. Wood shrinks less
radially than it does tangentially, and this may lead to
further distortion. For all practical purposes, shrinking
occurs only across the width and thickness of a board:
a green board which is 10'  81⁄2"  1" will still be 10'
long when cured, but it will be only about 8" wide
and 15⁄16" thick. There is generally less difference in
tangential and radial rates in the tropical species
without growth rings than in species with well-defined
growth rings, where the difference is substantial.
One obvious solution to the problems caused by
moisture is to cut boards so that they contain either
heartwood or sapwood, but not both. Quarter sawn
boards, which have sapwood only at their edges and
are cut radially rather than tangentially, will shrink,
swell, and cup far less than slab sawn lumber. Quarter
sawn boards are more dimensionally stable and they
also tend to be a little stronger and easier to shape and
mill. In slab sawn lumber, hard latewood and soft early
wood appear in wide bands on major surfaces and
cause difficulty in sanding, planing, and finishing.
Rotary-peeled veneers are cut with no regard whatso-
ever to patterns of heartwood, sapwood, and growth
rings and therefore have considerable potential for
internal stressing. Sliced veneers, by contrast, are cut
perpendicular to growth rings and are more stable.
Another, sometimes more practical, way to reduce
internal stressing in wood is to cut it up into thin
boards for drying. The reduction in volume while the
wood is still above fiber saturation relieves the lines
through which excessive tension could develop during
cure. We usually re-saw stock over 1" (25mm) thick,
and we laminate keels and sheer clamps which require
thicker stock. This is usually much easier than trying
to find a single piece of wood good enough for the job,
and even if we were able to find such a piece, a lamina-
tion would probably serve better.
Moisture and Physical Properties
If wood is taken at its fiber saturation point and allowed
to dry to 5% moisture content, its crushing strength and
20
Fundamentals of Wood/Epoxy Composite Boatbuilding
Figure 3-9 Shrinkage and distortion for wood of various cross
sections as affected by the direction of annual rings. Tangential
shrinkage is about twice as great as radial. (From Wood as an
Engineering Material, U.S. Department of Agriculture Handbook,
No. 72, p. 3-10.)

--- PAGE 35 ---
bending strength may easily be doubled and, in some
woods, tripled. The reason for this is the actual strength-
ening and stiffening of cell walls as they dry out. Not all
strength properties are changed in such a dramatic way.
Figure 3-10 gives a tentative average for several species
of wood of the change of various physical properties
per 1% decrease in moisture content. By multiplying
the values in the table, you can see that reducing the
moisture content of wood results in substantial increase
in its physical properties.
These data are averages for several species of wood and
therefore are not suitable for engineering work. We pres-
ent them only to illustrate the fact that up to a point,
dry wood makes a stronger boat. The percentage in-
creases in strength are the average for the entire range,
from 25% to 0%. The first test, for instance, shows that
in fiber stress at proportional limit in static bending, the
increase in value is 5% for every percentage point mois-
ture content is reduced below 25%. One hundred
percent is the reference value for 25% moisture content;
225% becomes the value at 0%. It is incorrect, however,
to conclude that the value is a straight line function of
moisture content and that it would be 105% at 24%,
110% at 23%, and so on. It’s most likely that in most
species of wood the percentage increase in the value is
higher as the moisture content is first lowered from 25%,
then lower as it approaches 0%.
While the effects of moisture on maximum load-to-failure
static properties are substantial, for most marine applica-
tions, the designer should not be overly concerned. Most
marine structures are subjected to stress levels well below
maximum static one-time load-to-failure conditions, and
the effect of moisture on lower load levels in long-term
fatigue is a more pertinent issue. Recent scattered and
preliminary Gougeon-developed fatigue data indicate
that the detrimental effects of higher moisture content
may diminish or even disappear at 10 million cycles
and beyond. These early indications require further
substantiation before the extent of the phenomenon
will be accurately known.
Wood/Epoxy Composites
Wood is strong, lightweight, stiff, and resistant to fatigue.
Some of its shortcomings as a material for engineering
result from inherent defects such as knots and grain
irregularity, but most are related to moisture. By using
wood as a reinforcing fiber, which may be bonded into
many shapes and forms with epoxy, we are able to make
the most of its structural advantages and overcome its
limitations.
The primary goal of incorporating wood in a composite
with epoxy is to provide its fibers with maximum prac-
tical protection against moisture. When it is able to
resist violent seasonal fluctuations in moisture and its
moisture level is stabilized at lower levels, wood
maintains good physical properties and dimensional
stability.
Wood/epoxy composites may also, when properly
engineered, provide a means of homogenizing the
defects and variations of lumber and of increasing its
strength in compression. Chances of failure of structural
boat members may be greatly reduced by using beams
laminated from a number of pieces of thinner wood
instead of a single board, particularly when grain align-
ment within a laminate is manipulated to best receive
predicted loads.
We seal all wood surfaces, those which come into
contact with water as well as those which come into
Chapter 3 – Wood as a Structural Material
21
Static Bending
Increase
Fiber stress at proportional limit
5%
Modulus of rupture, or crossbreaking strength
4%
Work to proportional limit
8%
Work to maximum load or shock-resisting ability
1⁄2%
Impact Bending
Fiber stress at proportional limit
3%
Work to proportional limit
4%
Compression Parallel to Grain
Fiber stress at proportional limit
51⁄2%
Hardness, end grain
4%
Hardness, side grain
21⁄2%
Shearing strength parallel to grain
3%
Tension perpendicular to grain
11⁄2%
References: “Strength and Related Properties of Woods,” Forest Products Laboratory,
Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture Technical Bulletin No. 479.
Wood Handbook: Wood as an Engineering Material, Forest Products Laboratory,
U.S. Department of Agriculture Handbook, No. 72.
Figure 3-10 Physical properties. Average increase is value
affected by lowering the moisture content 1% from fiber
saturation point, approximately 24% in most woods.

--- PAGE 36 ---
contact with air, with WEST SYSTEM epoxy and use
it as a bonding adhesive in all joints and laminates.
When applied in correct quantities, the epoxy forms
a thin continuous film, which serves as a moisture
barrier on exterior surfaces, in joints, and between
layers of veneer.
While this barrier is not perfect, it is far more realistic
than wrapping a boat in plastic. Moisture passage into
wood is limited to such an extent that any change in
moisture content within the wood itself is minimal. If
dry wood encapsulated in our epoxy is put in a high
humidity chamber and left for months, the wood’s
moisture content will eventually rise. The rate of
moisture change in wood/epoxy composites is so slow
under normal circumstances, however, that wood
remains at virtually constant levels in exact equilibrium
with average annual humidity. In most areas, this
equilibrium is between 8% and 12% moisture content.
A minimum of two unsanded coats of WEST SYSTEM
epoxy on all surfaces will form an adequate moisture
barrier. More coatings are desirable, especially if the
boat will be subjected to extremes between dry and
moist environments. Coating effectiveness reaches a
point of diminishing returns at five or six coats, where
improved moisture resistance does not balance the
weight of the extra epoxy. Any more than six coats of
epoxy may contribute to abrasion resistance but will
add little to the moisture barrier.
Large amounts of epoxy are used in coating and bonding
boats. Although ratios vary, depending primarily on
hull size, it’s not uncommon to find that 25% of the
weight of the basic hull structure is epoxy. About 20%
is more typical. Wood performance dominates, but
because so much of a boat is epoxy, the physical proper-
ties of the epoxy have a large effect on the physical
properties of the composite. For this reason, it’s impor-
tant that the epoxy portion of the composite contribute
more than weight.
A large range of physical properties can be developed
within present epoxy technology. Very flexible resins,
with good resistance to a single impact, can be formu-
lated, but they otherwise might contribute little to a
hull’s overall structure in their ability to pay for their
own weight in added stiffness and strength. Flexible
resins also have high strain rates, which can limit long-
term fatigue performance at higher load levels.
WEST SYSTEM epoxy is specifically formulated to
develop maximum physical properties while retaining
just enough toughness and flexibility to live with the
slight deformations which inevitably occur in any boat.
The most significant driving force in developing our
WEST SYSTEM epoxy formulation has been long-term
fatigue resistance. Wood is one of the most fatigue
resistant materials on earth. Any bonding adhesive used
to make joints or laminates must be of equally high
capability or the wood’s long-term performance will
be compromised. We have conducted a great deal
of fatigue testing on WEST SYSTEM epoxy and have
achieved performance at 10 million cycles, which is
approximately 40% of ultimate in torsional shear. (See
Appendix C.)
Determining Moisture Content
When using wood in composite with WEST SYSTEM
epoxy, it’s important to use only wood which has a
moisture content of 12% or less; 8% to 12% moisture
content is ideal. Boats can be built with wood with
moisture levels up to 18%, but in long-term equilib-
rium, they may lose some moisture, which could affect
structural integrity because of internal stressing from
shrinkage.
As we explained earlier, the moisture content of wood
varies according to the relative humidity and tempera-
ture of the atmosphere which surrounds it. For every
combination of temperature and humidity, there is a
moisture level that wood will seek, absorbing and
dispelling moisture until it reaches this equilibrium.
We keep our shop at 65°F (18°C), with relative
humidity averaging around 50%. In these conditions,
the moisture level equilibrium is 8%, and most of the
wood we work with has a moisture content near that
percentage.
Atmospheric conditions vary according to geography
and type of shelter. In most situations, the prevailing
conditions will be such that the equilibrium percentage
is below 12%. Figure 3-11 shows the equilibrium
22
Fundamentals of Wood/Epoxy Composite Boatbuilding

--- PAGE 37 ---
percentages of the moisture content of wood as a
function of relative humidity. The graph is good for
that temperature only. Relative humidity throughout
the United States is such that the 8% to 12% moisture
range is attainable.
The speed with which a piece of wood reaches equilib-
rium depends on the span between existing moisture
content and the percentage at equilibrium, and on the
ratio between exposed surface area and volume. Wood
tends to reach equilibrium faster when the difference
between equilibrium percentage as deduced from atmos-
pheric data and moisture content is greater. Extremely
wet wood expels moisture rapidly in an oven, and very
dry wood absorbs moisture quickly in a steam bath.
Thin veneer, which has a very large surface area and
relatively little volume, dries to brittleness or steams
until it is very pliable within hours. Whole logs, which
have huge volumes and little surface area, can take
years to reach equilibrium.
If you have any doubts about the moisture content
of lumber, test it. Tests are necessary on newly
acquired lumber or lumber that has been stored under
questionable conditions. We use an electronic tester,
and battery operated, hand-held moisture meters are
now relatively inexpensive. Some local building
inspectors and lumberyards have moisture meters
and will test specimens brought to them. On thicker
stock, moisture meter readings may not represent the
true moisture content inside the stock. You can deter-
mine the actual moisture content by tests performed
in your kitchen.
To do this, weigh wood samples on a gram or postage
scale before and after placing them in a 225°F (107°C)
oven. It’s impossible to predict how quickly a sample
will lose all of its moisture because this depends on
variables such as sample size and original moisture
content. Continue baking and checking every half-
hour until no further weight reduction takes place
and moisture level is therefore reduced to 0%.
Apply the following formula to your results:
100 (W1 – W2) = P
W2
W1 is the weight before drying, W2 is the weight after
drying and P is the percentage moisture content of the
specimen before drying.
Dry Rot (and Other Vermin)
While some of the effects of moisture in wood may
be eliminated by careful selection of quarter sawn
and sliced boards or veneer and by careful control of
moisture levels, others cannot. When its moisture level
is at or near fiber saturation point, seasoned wood
becomes susceptible to fungus damage, often called
dry rot or brown rot. This causes millions of dollars
of damage each year to wooden structures of all kinds;
more wooden ships may have been lost to it than to
all of the storms and naval battles of history.
Neither very dry nor totally submerged wood is likely
to decay. In fact, wood sealed for 3,000 years in Egyptian
tombs at a constant temperature and humidity level has
lost none of its physical properties. But wood used in
boats is usually damp and therefore, if oxygen is present
and temperatures warm, subject to the types of fungi that
cause rot by feeding on the cellulose in cured lumber.
When this happens, the wood becomes browner, and it
may crack, shrink, and collapse. Attempts to eradicate
the fungi have usually revolved around poisoning their
food supply. Most of the commercial wood preservatives
that use this approach have only limited success on
boats because marine moisture levels are so high that
the poisons are quickly diluted.
Chapter 3 – Wood as a Structural Material
23
Figure 3-11 Equilibrium moisture content as a function of
relative humidity.

--- PAGE 38 ---
24
Fundamentals of Wood/Epoxy Composite Boatbuilding
We suggest a different solution to dry rot. In order
to survive long enough to cause decay, brown rot
fungi need food and oxygen. In warm weather, the
fungi make rapid progress, but in temperatures above
90°F (32°C) and below 50°F (10°C), they are much
slower. Despite its name, dry rot will not occur in dry
wood or in wood moistened only by humid air. Neither
is it a problem when wood is so saturated with water
that air cannot penetrate to fungi in its interior.
It’s impossible to keep wood boats dry. When cured
wood is encapsulated in WEST SYSTEM epoxy, however,
its moisture level cannot reach fiber saturation point and
it therefore is no longer susceptible to fungi. Coatings
of epoxy provide additional insurance against rot
by restricting oxygen supply.
Encapsulation in WEST SYSTEM epoxy also seems
to provide wood with some protection against two
other common predators. Testing has shown that
exterior coatings of WEST SYSTEM epoxy will restrict
termite damage. Although no scientific investigations
have conclusively proven the phenomenon, ship-
worms and other wood-boring mollusks seem
unwilling to pass through lines of WEST SYSTEM
epoxy. They may typically attack the bottom of a
laminated rudder or centerboard and go no farther
than the first glue line.

--- PAGE 39 ---
This chapter describes the WEST SYSTEM products that are used in the procedures described throughout
the book. It is substantially updated from previous editions and refers to the current (2005) product line.
The WEST SYSTEM product line has steadily evolved over the years. New products have been added to
provide greater versatility. Others have been removed or superseded by improved versions. For example,
we may now refer to 207 Hardener or 209 Hardener for some situations, whereas earlier editions refer to
205 or 206 Hardener, the only hardeners available at that time. Gougeon Brothers is continually researching,
testing, and improving our epoxy formulations. We are also evaluating and developing new or improved
supplemental products. Therefore, we recommend that you refer to the WEST SYSTEM User Manual & Product Guide
before starting any project. You can request a free copy from West System Inc. or your local WEST SYSTEM
dealer, or visit westsystem.com. 
In the 1960s, when we began building boats profes-
sionally, we had a few ideas about what we wanted
from our materials. We needed practical, low-cost, and
versatile methods. We knew how to work with wood,
but as boat owners, we also knew about the problems
of maintaining wooden boats. We wanted to build fast,
lightweight boats that were tough and strong enough
to survive the high loads of hard racing. We had limited
time and money, so our materials and methods couldn’t
be fussy or expensive.
After some experimenting, we found what we were
looking for. Post-World War II technological advances
had led to the development of epoxide resins. We began
using epoxy and wood together, building composite
structures with methods that had been used to construct
wooden airplanes. Realizing that a boat’s ability to stand
up to a single impact was not as important as its long-
term resistance to the daily assaults of wind and water,
we modified epoxy formulations until we found the
best balance between flexibility and high strength. In a
few years, we had worked out a safe and effective way
to build boats. Our materials were inexpensive, and our
methods balanced the benefits of using wood against its
shortcomings. We polished our techniques to reduce
labor and, at the same time, to establish safe handling
procedures for the new epoxy system.
Because we worked with the epoxy every day, we
became concerned very early about the potential short
and long-term health hazards of the new materials. We
were very cautious in choosing ingredients for our
product. Just as we aimed for a balance between flexi-
bility and high strength, we looked for and found a
formulation that was effective and low in toxicity.
We began to market WEST SYSTEM epoxy and associ-
ated products in 1972. Since then, we’ve continued to
improve our methods and materials and we’ve learned
a great deal more about them. WEST SYSTEM epoxy
seemed strong. We learned, after intensive test programs,
that its physical properties, and particularly its ability
to withstand repeated loads, are extremely high. Our
hunch that our boatbuilding techniques could be
applied to volume production of high-quality airfoils
was confirmed. During the wind energy boom of the
1980s, Gougeon Brothers, Inc. was a leading manufac-
turer of laminated wind turbine blades, proving that our
wood/epoxy composite was and still is a competitive,
modern material.
Product diversification has been our way to make sure
that we can continue to build and sail boats. If our lab
generates data for wind turbine blades, we look at
boatbuilding applications. If we make modifications in
formulations or techniques, we test to see where they can
be used in boats. WEST SYSTEM epoxy has been inten-
sively studied, particularly for cyclic fatigue resistance, in
several laboratories, and it has been proven in the field,
so to speak, on ocean-racing boats. Our most recently
designed boats reflect years of engineering and produc-
tion with epoxy, wood, and other composite materials.
WEST SYSTEM
® Products
C H A P T E R
4

--- PAGE 40 ---
Our line of products grew as the use of WEST SYSTEM
materials increased. We still blend resin and hardeners
with additives to make a strong, moisture and fatigue-
resistant epoxy. Ongoing research has led to the develop-
ment of improved high-density filler and a low-density,
easily sanded fairing filler. The epoxy formulation has
also been fine-tuned so that it is easier to work with in
difficult conditions. We now distribute epoxy, fillers,
additives, fibers, and associated tools worldwide.
Characteristics of WEST SYSTEM Epoxy
WEST SYSTEM resin and hardeners are the base compo-
nents of a two-part epoxy developed specifically for use
in wooden boatbuilding. Our epoxy and additives are
formulated to provide maximum physical properties
and, at the same time, to be as easy to use as possible.
WEST SYSTEM products are designed to be versatile so
that boatbuilders can mix epoxy and fillers on site
in the specific formulations needed for various jobs.
The builder can select from a range of hardeners and
additives that allow the mixture’s handling characteristics
and the physical properties of the cured epoxy to be
tailored to suit working conditions and specific coating
or bonding applications.
WEST SYSTEM epoxy cures to a hard, solid plastic with
superior mechanical properties. When small amounts
of filler are added to mixed resin and hardener, WEST
SYSTEM epoxy becomes a very strong, gap-filling
adhesive. Joints bonded with it are often stronger than
the wood fibers that surround them. Other combina-
tions of WEST SYSTEM epoxy and fillers produce
mixtures that can be used in fairing and filleting. WEST
SYSTEM epoxy is an excellent medium for transferring
loads from wood fiber to metals. It will serve as an
efficient interface for distributing high-point loading
over greater surface area than would otherwise be
possible. WEST SYSTEM products will bond fiberglass,
aramid (Kevlar™), graphite, and other synthetic fibers
in structural and reinforcing applications. 
The success of any epoxy/wood composite depends in
part on the epoxy’s ability to shield the wood beneath it
from moisture. While WEST SYSTEM epoxy does not
form an absolute moisture barrier, as little as two coat-
ings of it will impede the passage of moisture vapor to
such an extent that the moisture content of the encap-
sulated wood is relatively stable. When its constant
fluctuations of moisture content are under control,
wood has predictable mechanical properties and
dimensional stability. When moisture content is low
and oxygen restricted, dry rot fungi cannot survive.
A WEST SYSTEM epoxy moisture barrier creates a
stable base for paint and varnish. Wood surfaces
protected with coatings of WEST SYSTEM epoxy cannot
become saturated with water. Paint therefore adheres
better, with less cracking and lifting, than it does to
untreated wood. Boats built with wood and epoxy
require less maintenance than traditionally
built wooden boats, and they will not blister as
polyester boats do.
Boats built with epoxy and wood are relatively inexpen-
sive. Wood itself is among the cheapest of boatbuilding
materials, but high labor and maintenance costs have
made the price of traditional wooden boats non-compet-
itive. Wood/epoxy construction methods require less
labor and equipment than earlier planking systems.
Epoxy will bond at room temperatures with little clamp-
ing pressure, so few specialized tools and molds are
needed. As a result, overhead can be drastically reduced,
and parts manufacture is flexible.
Our body of knowledge about wood/epoxy composites
grows with each day of testing. Current product data is
published in our technical manuals, in our newsletter,
and on our website. Our technical staff is always avail-
able to answer questions and to help solve application
problems.
Fatigue Behavior of WEST SYSTEM Epoxy
For many years we have used WEST SYSTEM epoxy
as a medium to transfer loads from low-density wood
to high-density metals. Our techniques for bonding
large and small fasteners, hardware, and keels are fully
explained in Chapter 14, “Hardware Bonding.” In most
cases, all load is transferred through epoxy which has
been thickened with fillers. This idea has been very
successful and is now widely used in the marine
industry.
In the process of developing wind turbine blades, we
quickly found that the epoxy interface between metal
load take-off studs and wood fiber was the critical
element in blade performance. Blade failure usually
initiates failure of the entire wind machine. To predict
26
Fundamentals of Wood/Epoxy Composite Boatbuilding

--- PAGE 41 ---
blade performance life, we needed to learn more about
the long-term fatigue behavior of WEST SYSTEM epoxy.
Very little fatigue testing had been performed on epoxy
alone, and the long-term fatigue capability of the epoxy
in many composite applications was a question mark. 
A number of different methods have been used to
test WEST SYSTEM epoxy in fatigue depending upon
specific needs for material design data to support wind
turbine blade efforts, and, in recent years, composite
design for marine architects and other boatbuilders.
While it is difficult to make general conclusions from
specific test data, it is apparent that WEST SYSTEM
epoxy exhibits good fatigue life and can maintain a
reasonable percentage of its one-time-to-failure load
capability after undergoing 10 million fatigue cycles.
(See Appendix C for further details.)
WEST SYSTEM® Resin and Hardeners
The following product descriptions are subject to change.
Research and product development at Gougeon Brothers
is ongoing. As regulations, market demands, and tech-
nology change, WEST SYSTEM products will change.
We will improve formulas, add new products, and drop
products as necessary. We recommend that you refer
to the current WEST SYSTEM User Manual & Product
Guide for up-to-date and more detailed product descrip-
tions and handling information.
105 Epoxy Resin is the base material of the WEST
SYSTEM family of products, on which all of WEST
SYSTEM compounds are built. The resin is a clear, pale
yellow, low-viscosity liquid epoxy resin. It is mixed with
WEST SYSTEM hardeners and cures at room temperature
to form a high-strength solid with excellent moisture
resistance. Hardeners are selected for their cure speed
and temperature range.
WEST SYSTEM epoxy is designed specifically to wet out
and bond with wood fiber, fiberglass, reinforcing
fabrics, and a variety of metals. It is an excellent adhesive
that will bridge gaps and fill voids when modified with
WEST SYSTEM fillers and can be sanded and shaped
when cured. With roller applications, it has excellent
thin-film characteristics to flow out and self-level without
“fisheyeing.” WEST SYSTEM epoxy cures clear, so you
can achieve a natural finish when coating with varnish.
It is formulated without volatile solvents and does not
shrink after curing. It has a relatively high flash point and
no strong solvent odor, making it safer to work with than
polyester or vinylester resins. 
205 Fast Hardener is a medium-viscosity epoxy curing
agent. It is used in a majority of situations, at lower
temperatures—as low as 40°F (4°C)—and to produce a
rapid cure that develops its physical properties quickly
at room temperature. When mixed with the 105 Resin
in a five-parts resin to one-part hardener ratio, the cured
resin/hardener mixture yields a rigid, high-strength,
moisture-resistant solid with excellent bonding and
coating properties. Pot life at 72°F (22°C) is 9 to 12
minutes.
206 Slow Hardener is a low-viscosity epoxy curing
agent for use when extended working and cure time is
needed or to provide adequate working time at higher
temperatures. When combined with 105 Resin in a
five-parts resin to one-part hardener ratio, the cured
resin/hardener mixture yields a rigid, high-strength,
moisture-resistant solid with excellent bonding and
coating properties. Pot life at 72°F (22°C) is 20 to 25
minutes.
207 Special Coating Hardener was developed for
coating and fiberglass cloth application where an excep-
tionally clear, moisture-resistant, natural wood finish is
Chapter 4 – WEST SYSTEM® Products
27
Figure 4-1 WEST SYSTEM resin and hardeners with mini pumps.

--- PAGE 42 ---
desired. WEST SYSTEM 105/207 mixtures resist clouding
in humid conditions and exhibit extremely low blush
formation. 105/207 offers excellent fiberglass wet-out
characteristics and has strong physical properties, so
it can be used as a structural adhesive for gluing and
laminating. It has excellent compatibility with paints
and varnishes. 105/207 cures to a light amber color,
similar to traditional spar varnishes. The mix ratio is
three-parts resin to one-part hardener. Pot life at 72°F
(22°C) is 22 to 27 minutes, about the same as 206
Slow Hardener.
209 Extra Slow Hardener is formulated for use
with WEST SYSTEM 105 Resin for general coating and
bonding applications in extremely warm and/or humid
conditions or when extended working time is desired
at room temperature. It provides approximately twice
the working time of 206 Slow Hardener. It forms a
clear, amber-colored solid with good physical properties
and moisture resistance for bonding and coating appli-
cations. The mix ratio is three-parts resin to one-part
hardener. Pot life at 72°F (22°C) is 40 to 50 minutes
or 15 to 20 minutes at 95°F (35°C). 
WEST SYSTEM Fillers and Additives
Fillers are used to thicken the basic resin/hardener
mixture for specific applications. Each filler possesses
a unique set of physical characteristics, but they can be
generally categorized as either Adhesive (high-density,
high-strength) or Fairing (low-density). Adhesive filler
mixtures cure to a strong, hard-to-sand plastic useful
in structural applications like bonding, filleting, and
hardware bonding. Fairing filler mixtures cure to light-
weight, easily sanded material that is generally used for
cosmetic or surface applications like shaping, filling, or
fairing.
403 Microfibers is a fine fiber blend adhesive filler used
to thicken epoxy to create a multipurpose adhesive that
is especially useful for bonding wood. Epoxy thickened
with 403 has good gap-filling qualities while retaining
excellent wetting/penetrating capability. The mixture
cures to an off-white color.
404 High-Density is an adhesive filler developed for
maximum physical properties in hardware bonding
where high-cyclic loads are anticipated. It can also be
used for filleting and gap filling where maximum
strength is necessary. The mixture cures to an off-
white color.
405 Filleting Blend is a strong, wood-toned adhesive
filler, good for use in glue joints and fillets on naturally
finished wood. It mixes easily with epoxy and has good
gap-filling properties. It cures to a dark brown color and
can be used to modify the color of other WEST SYSTEM
filler mixtures.
406 Colloidal Silica is an adhesive filler used to
control the viscosity of the epoxy and prevent epoxy
runoff in vertical and overhead joints. 406 is a very
strong filler that creates a smooth mixture, ideal for
general bonding and filleting. It is also our most versa-
tile filler. Often used in combination with other fillers,
it can be used to improve the strength, abrasion resist-
ance, and consistency of fairing compounds, resulting in
a tougher, smoother surface. The mixture cures to an
off-white color.
407 Low-Density is a blended microballoon-based
fairing filler used to make fairing putties that are easy
to sand or carve. Mixtures are reasonably strong on a
strength-to-weight basis and cure to a dark red/brown
color.
28
Fundamentals of Wood/Epoxy Composite Boatbuilding
Figure 4-2 WEST SYSTEM application tools include mixing
pots, mixing sticks, roller frames, roller covers, roller pans,
glue brushes, spreaders, fillable caulking tubes, and syringes.

--- PAGE 43 ---
410 Microlight™is the ideal low-density fairing filler
for creating a light, easily-worked fairing compound
especially suited for fairing large areas. Microlight™
mixes with greater ease than 407 Low-Density Filler
or microballoons and is approximately 30% easier to
sand. It feathers to a fine edge and is more economical
for large fairing jobs. It is not recommended under
dark paint or other surfaces that could be subject to
high temperatures. The mixture cures to a light tan
color.
Additives are blended with mixed epoxy to alter the
physical properties of epoxy when used as a coating.
Additives can be used to alter the color, abrasion resist-
ance, or moisture resistance of cured epoxy.
420 Aluminum Powder provides limited protection
from ultraviolet light in areas that will not be protected
with other coatings. It can be used as a base for subse-
quent painting. 420 will increase the hardness and
abrasion resistance of the coated surface and improve
its moisture resistance. Mixtures cure to a metallic gray
color.
423 Graphite Powder is a fine black powder that can
be mixed with WEST SYSTEM epoxy to produce a low-
friction exterior coating with increased scuff resistance
and durability. Epoxy/graphite is commonly used as a
bearing surface and as a coating on rudders and center-
boards or the bottoms of racing craft that are dry sailed.
It does not provide antifouling qualities. Graphite
powder can also be added to epoxy thickened with 404
High-Density Filler for use in teak deck construction to
simulate the look of traditional seams and to protect
the epoxy from sunlight. Mixtures cure to a black color. 
501 White Pigment and 503 Gray Pigment are
epoxy-based liquid colorants used to tint the epoxy
mixture to provide an even color base for the final finish
system. The colored surfaces also tend to highlight
flaws and imperfections. Cured, pigmented epoxy
surfaces are not a final finish surface but require an
additional paint or UV filter coating for ultraviolet
protection.
For colors other than white or gray, powdered pigments
(tempera paint, colored tile grout, aniline dyes) and
universal tinting pigment can be added to the epoxy
mixture. Acrylic paste pigments (available from marine
chandleries) may also be used to tint the mixture as long
as they are specified for use with polyester or epoxy
resin. 423 Graphite Powder will color the epoxy black
or impart darker shades to colors.
Generally, coloring agents can be added to the mixed
epoxy up to 5% by volume with minimal effect on the
cured epoxy’s strength. Always make test samples to
check for desired color and opaqueness and for proper
cure. None of these coloring additives provide UV resist-
ance to the cured epoxy, so limit their use to areas not
exposed to sunlight unless additional UV protection is
applied.
860 Aluminum Etch is not an additive but a two-
step surface treatment for aluminum that significantly
improves WEST SYSTEM epoxy’s adhesion to aluminum
for bonding and coating.
WEST SYSTEM Reinforcing Materials
Unidirectional Carbon Tapes are used for selective
reinforcement to improve tensile strength and stiffness in
one direction while adding minimum thickness and
weight. Fiber bundles are held in place by a polyester
fill thread for easy handling and wet out. 
Unidirectional Glass Tapes are also used to add
strength in one direction, but with less stiffness than
carbon fiber. They are also easy to handle and wet out. 
Biaxial Tapes are a non-woven E glass fabric. Two layers
at a ±45° fiber orientation are held together by a light
stitching. Flat, non-crimped fibers yield reduced print-
through and higher stiffness than woven fabrics. Biaxial
Tapes are ideal for repairs, tabbing, and reinforcing. 
Glass Tapes are versatile 9 oz (305g/m2) woven fabric,
ideal for reinforcing chines, hull/deck corners, and
similar structural applications. When bonded with
WEST SYSTEM epoxy, they provide additional tensile
strength to resist hairline crack development and
abrasion. They have bound edges for ease of use and are
available in a variety of convenient widths.
Biaxial Fabrics are non-woven E glass fabrics, with
two layers, ±45° fiber orientation. They are used for
composites, repairs, and reinforcing and will achieve a
high fiber-to-resin ratio with hand wet-out. They are
also available with a lightweight, chopped-strand mat
backing.
Chapter 4 – WEST SYSTEM® Products
29

--- PAGE 44 ---
Glass Fabrics are easy-to-handle woven fabrics,
ideal for building composite laminates and reinforcing
structures. They are often used to provide an abrasion-
resistant covering for wooden structures. When wet
out, 4 oz (135g/m2) and 6 oz (200g/m2) fabrics
become transparent, allowing a clear, natural wood
finish, perfect for stripper canoes. 
WEST SYSTEM Metering Pumps
If too much or too little hardener is mixed with 105
Resin, the mixture will not cure properly or reach full
strength. Resin and hardener can be metered by carefully
weighing proportions or measuring the proper volumes
of each component, but calibrated metering pumps
provide the easiest, most accurate dispensing method.
Weight or volume measuring is used for very large or
very small batches of epoxy or if metering pumps are
not available.
Mini Pumps are designed for convenient and accurate
metering of all sizes of resin and hardeners. They mount
directly on resin and hardener containers and eliminate
the mess involved with measuring by weight or volume.
Large capacity pumps are designed for large projects and
manufacturing operations. Reservoirs hold resin and
hardener, and higher volumes of properly metered resin
and hardeners are simultaneously dispensed.
Mixing and Handling
Careful measuring of epoxy resin and hardener and
thorough mixing are essential for a proper cure.
Whether the resin/hardener mixture is applied as
a coating or modified with fillers or additives,
observing the following procedures will assure a
controlled and thorough chemical transition to a
high-strength epoxy solid.
For most users and projects, WEST SYSTEM Mini Pumps
are the most practical way to dispense epoxy. When
using mini pumps, pump one full pump stroke of resin
for each one full pump stroke of hardener. Depress each
pump head fully and allow the head to come completely
back to the top before beginning the next stroke.
Partial strokes will give the wrong ratio. We recom-
mend alternating resin and hardener strokes so that
you don’t lose track of the number of strokes in the
middle of a batch. 
Dispense the correct proportions of resin and hardener
into a clean plastic, metal, or wax-free paper container.
WEST SYSTEM Poly Mixing Pots are conveniently sized
and are reusable. Don’t use glass or foam containers
because of the potential danger from exothermic heat
buildup. Don’t attempt to adjust the epoxy cure time
by altering the mix ratio. Read the pump instructions
before using pumps. Use a larger pot or a smaller
quantity of resin and hardener if you will be adding
fillers.
To meter resin and hardener by weight or volume, refer
to the hardener container for the proper ratio. When
metering by weight, remember to subtract the weight
of the container. Use a small capacity scale and check
that it is accurate. Avoid mixing more than a pound of
epoxy at one time unless you have a number of helpers.
It’s a good idea to weigh ingredients separately.
Metering by volume is less accurate because the densi-
ties of resin and hardener are different, but it can be
quick and convenient. One way to mix correct ratios
by volume is to mark a clean stick at equal intervals
and hold it upright in a cylindrical container. Fill with
resin to the third or fifth line (depending on which
hardener you are using) and then add hardener until
you reach the fourth or sixth line.
The first time you mix WEST SYSTEM epoxy, it is
a good idea to begin with a small test batch without
applying the mixture to your project. This will give you
a feel for the mixing and curing process, demonstrate
the hardener’s open time for the temperature you are
working in, and assure you that the resin/hardener ratio
is metered properly. Mix small batches until you are
confident of the mixture’s handling characteristics and
can accurately estimate how big a batch you can mix
and apply before the mixture begins to kick off.
Stir the resin and hardener together thoroughly—at
least one minute, longer in cooler temperatures. To
assure thorough mixing, scrape the sides and bottom
of the pot as you mix. Use a square-ended mixing stick
to reach the inside corner of the pot. If you are using a
power mixer, occasionally scrape the sides and corners
of the mixing pot while mixing. If you are going to be
30
Fundamentals of Wood/Epoxy Composite Boatbuilding

--- PAGE 45 ---
using the mixture for coating, quickly pour it into a
roller pan to extend the open time. 
WARNING! Curing epoxy generates heat. Do not fill
voids or cast layers of epoxy thicker than 1⁄2" (12mm)—
thinner if enclosed by foam or other insulating material.
Several inches of mixed epoxy in a confined mass
(such as a mixing cup) will generate enough heat to
melt a plastic cup, burn your skin, or ignite combustible
materials if you leave it to stand for its full pot life. For
this reason, don’t use foam or glass mixing containers
or pour mixtures into confined spaces. If a pot of mixed
epoxy begins to heat up, or exotherm, quickly move it
outdoors and away from combustible surfaces. Avoid
breathing the fumes. Don’t dispose of the mixture
until the reaction is complete and has cooled.
For WEST SYSTEM epoxy to be an effective moisture
barrier, a minimum of two coats should be applied to
all interior and exterior surfaces. Areas that will be
sanded need at least three coats of epoxy so that two
net coats will remain after finishing. We recommend
two additional coatings on hulls that are left in the
water year round. All epoxies eventually break down
under direct sunlight, so epoxy-coated surfaces should
be protected with paint or ultraviolet-resistant varnish
or, temporarily, with WEST SYSTEM 420 Aluminum
Powder or 501 White Pigment additives.
We recommend that WEST SYSTEM epoxy be used only
on wood which has a moisture level between 8% and
12%, but realize that in emergencies it may be neces-
sary to bond wetter materials. WEST SYSTEM epoxy can
be used on wood which has an 18% moisture level,
although internal stressing may develop. With damper
wood, there is also a possibility that excessive moisture
may affect the performance of the hardeners, which are
water-soluble.
Throughout this book, we refer to epoxy or resin/
hardener mixture meaning mixed resin and hardener
without fillers added; and thickened mixture or thickened
epoxy meaning mixed resin and hardener with fillers
added. Fillers are used to thicken epoxy for specific
applications such as bonding or fairing.
Always mix the desired quantity of resin and hardener
thoroughly before adding fillers. Then blend in small
handfuls or scoops of the appropriate filler until you
reach the desired consistency. It has been hard to devise
a terminology that accurately describes the exact thick-
ness or viscosity needed for a particular job. Our choices,
as shown in Figure 4-4 of peanut butter, mayonnaise,
catsup, or syrup may seem slightly incongruous. They
are, however, universally understandable.
Epoxy Chemistry
Mixing epoxy resin and hardener initiates an exothermic
polymerization reaction. Molecules react to build cross-
linked polymer chains, giving off energy in the form of
heat as they bond. An epoxy mixture will look the same
for a time and then, as the reaction accelerates, it gels,
thickening and changing from a liquid to a solid. The
time it takes for this transformation is the cure time. As
it cures, the epoxy passes from the liquid state, through
a gel state, before it reaches a solid state.
Chapter 4 – WEST SYSTEM® Products
31
Figure 4-3 For professionals or those with large projects,
taking the trouble to set up a mixing cart can save consider-
able labor hours. The object is to organize all WEST SYSTEM
products and related supplies used in a project in the same
place, so you can use them with little wasted time or effort.
The metering pump (with a drip tray) is surrounded by mixing
pots, mixing sticks, and disposable gloves. In addition to
application tools, the cart holds all necessary fillers and
additives. A paper towel dispenser is very useful. For smaller
projects, a portable caddy with essential products and applica-
tion tools may be more useful.
Supply Bins
309 Gear Pump
Hand Cleaner

--- PAGE 46 ---
l. Liquid—Open time (also working time or wet lay-up
time) is the portion of the cure time, after mixing,
that the resin/hardener mixture remains a liquid and
is workable and suitable for application. All assembly
and clamping should take place during the open time
to assure a dependable bond.
2. Gel—The mixture passes into an Initial Cure Phase
(also called the green stage) when it begins to gel, or
kick-off. The epoxy is no longer workable and will
progress from a tacky, gel consistency to the firmness
of hard rubber. You will be able to dent it with your
thumbnail.
The mixture will become tack free about midway
through the initial cure phase. While it is still tacky
(about like masking tape), a new application of epoxy
will still chemically link with it, so you may still bond to
or recoat the surface without special preparation. How-
ever, this ability diminishes as the mixture approaches
the final cure phase.
3. Solid—In the Final Cure Phase the epoxy mixture
has cured to a solid state and can be dry sanded. You
will no longer be able to dent it with your thumb-
nail. At this point, the epoxy has reached most of its
ultimate strength, so clamps can be removed. A new
application of e