ld
be examined during
bonding.
Square has blocking
to allow for overhang 
of plywood 
deck or 
side.
This basic stringer marking
gauge can be used for
layout of notches in frame
and deck beams as well as
marking plywood panels for
fastening to stringers.
Holes drilled 
in tongue for
pencil or sribe
Stringers
Chine or sheer

--- PAGE 302 ---
Another method is to draw the stringer locations on the
interior of the ply, preferably after prefinishing it. Then
transfer the marks to the outside by measuring from a
point on the panel edge to a marked position or by
drilling very small holes in the stringers and connecting
them with lines on the panel exterior. Whatever marking
technique you use, be accurate. Although missed
staples can be removed and repaired, this takes time.
Many missed staples can create substantially more work
than the little effort needed to properly mark stringer
and frame locations.
Applying Panels
Use a high-density adhesive mixture slightly thicker
than heavy syrup to bond the panels to the framework.
If you have larger gaps to fill, you may need adhesive
with a thicker, peanut butter consistency. Wash off
previously sanded, epoxy-coated surfaces to remove
dust and dirt and apply thickened epoxy to all joints. If
the panels have not yet been coated, roll unthickened
epoxy on any bare bonding surfaces before applying the
thickened mixture. Use enough thickened adhesive so
that some squeezes out of the joint. This indicates a
100% bond.
It usually takes at least two people to maneuver a panel.
Try to avoid dragging it across the framework and
smearing the epoxy. If you have tacked the panel for
fitting and have left the nails in place, line them up
with their holes and insert them. If you do not have the
nails to guide you, line up surmarks and insert one or
two locating staples at various central points on the
panel to hold it in position while you check that every-
thing fits as it should.
With sheet plywood, we prefer to use narrow-crown
alloy staples, which can be left in place. Narrow-crown
staples cause less damage to the plywood and, if they
are slightly recessed, their holes are easier to fill and fair
over for a smooth, easy-to-finish surface. Staples left in
chines may cause problems if you round the joints, so
use wide-crown staples in this situation and remove
them before you begin shaping.
Staples that are three times as long as the plywood
thickness are usually adequate to hold the ply as it
bends over moderate curves. In areas where the curve
is so sharp that staples cannot hold the panel, use
screws and large washers or other suitable types of pads
for temporary clamping pressure and to distribute load
until the adhesive cures. You can use nails with plywood
pads, but we are not keen on the idea of using alloy
boat nails and leaving them permanently in the hull.
The main difficulty with boat nails is that their heads
tend to show in the joint and greatly detract from a
good surface finish.
After you have successfully bonded one panel to the
framework, immediately clean up the excess adhesive
that has squeezed out from between the joints. (See
Chapter 22 for further discussion of cleanup procedures.)
Installation of the second panel becomes more compli-
cated because of the added difficulty of performing the
bonding operation on at least one scarf joint at the same
time that you are installing the panel. You should have
already prefit and cut the scarf joint on this second panel.
(Remember, with prefinished panels, you must cut the
scarf joint on the opposite surface of the plywood on
the second panel in order for the scarf bevels to mate.)
With the second panel, it is worthwhile to make a dry
run to check the surmarks and make sure that scarf joint
alignment is still accurate. Note any differences and
change the surmarks to ensure an accurate final instal-
lation. Be very critical of your scarf joint alignment to
prevent misalignment of the beveled scarf cut on either
panel, which would cause unfairness in the skin. Because
scarfing in place on the hull is a little more difficult
than in a more controlled situation, we always provide a
safety margin by applying an excess amount of adhesive
to both beveled surfaces of the panels to be joined.
Pay special attention as you apply pressure to the scarf.
Staple through a plastic-covered strip of plywood
slightly wider than the joint for more uniform pressure
over its surface. Use staples, nails, or screws to apply
maximum pressure through the joint to a solid member
under it. To bring the exterior edges tightly together,
use shorter staples which do not penetrate through the
plywood. The interior edges of the scarf will probably
need relatively little pressure because the curvature of
the hull usually squeezes them together. If they do not
fit tightly, remove excess adhesive and bring them
together with a plywood strip and shorter staples as
you did on the exterior. (See Figure 24-6.)
288
Hull Construction Methods

--- PAGE 303 ---
If you are using 3⁄8" (9mm) or thicker plywood, you can
scarf in place on the hull without worrying about
locating the joint over a solid member. In situations
where you find that your sheet is only a few inches
short of a frame and that you will have to cut off a
substantial amount of material to retreat to the previous
frame, the ability to scarf anywhere saves a great deal of
plywood. Marking is simplified because the scarf
doesn’t have to be centered on a fixed point. Make sure,
however, that there is enough longitudinal support
between the two panels to keep them reasonably
aligned as you scarf.
Figure 24-9 illustrates two methods for scarfing
between frames. The first, for thinner plywood, is to fit
and bond blocking between stringers with the center-
line of the blocking lined up with the centerline of the
joint. The second is to apply a temporary blocking. For
this, use plywood thick enough to receive a staple. Cut
it to the approximate width of the joint and saw it to
length to fit between the stringers. Someone on the
underside of the boat should hold the blocking in
position while another person staples through the scarf
from the top.
The only difficulty with this method is that you need to
support the interior blocking adequately so that it will
receive staples, but not push so hard that you force the
scarf joint up and out of fair during the assembly
process. With thicker plywood, this isn’t too difficult,
but it can be a problem with thinner material. You can
minimize this problem by securing the scarf joint with
staples at the stringers, keel, chine, or any other solid
area before applying pressure on the temporary
blocking. One advantage of using the permanent rather
than temporary blocking system is that this blocking
can serve as a core over which you can manufacture a
frame in the completed hull. In this case, frame material
is laminated on the interior blocking surface,
completing a rigid, I-beam type frame system, as
discussed in Chapter 22.
When you have installed all of the panels in one section
of the hull and the adhesive has cured, you can remove
all temporary staples. We always remove the staples
from the scarf joints and usually from the chine and
keel because of the heavy fairing that may take place in
these areas. The next step is to plane off the excess
plywood smooth with the opposite chine surface so that
you can fit and install the next panel on the other side
of the chine to create a plywood overlap.
Chapter 24 – Hard Chine Plywood Construction
289
Figure 24-8  Applying adhesive mixture before bonding a
panel to the framework. The panel lying against the frame-
work in the foreground will be scarfed in place.
Figure 24-9 Blocking between stringers for scarfing plywood
in place.
Temporary blocking, made
from plywood scraps, goes
in with flat side against 
the scarf. There should 
be plastic between 
the blocking 
and scarf.
Permanent blocking 
between stringers to support 
the scarf. This arrangement lends
itself to I-beam frame construction.
Stringers
Chine log
or clamp

--- PAGE 304 ---
Composite Chine Construction
Many smaller boats and some larger ones have been
built with no chine log at all. Instead, the plywood
panels are joined with a composite chine made of fiber-
glass cloth or tape as shown in Figure 24-10. This is
also referred to as stitch-and-glue construction. It is
frequently used in kit boats, such as kayaks and small
craft. A variety of stitch-and-glue plans are also now
available for drift boats, car toppers, power, and
sailboats. Some are well over 20' (6m) in length. In
most cases, especially with thinner plywood, it’s easy to
manufacture a fiberglass joint between two plywood
panels that is stronger than the plywood.
Stitch-and-glue is a method where plywood panels are
cut into specific shapes that eventually get connected
together along the keel, chines, stems, and transom to
create specific hull forms. The panels are pulled into
shape with pieces of soft wire (or plastic wire ties) that
are fed through matching holes drilled along the edges
of the mating panels. Each twisted wire or plastic wire
tie forms another “stitch” along the joint. In simple
designs, the panels can be connected together without
elaborate mold frames or stringers. In larger designs,
permanent or temporary frames are required to help
define the shape. These are typically few in number as
the panels end up being quite stiff when bent and
connected along the joints. Gaps of up to 1⁄4" (6mm) are
acceptable as the joint will be filled with a generous
fillet of thickened epoxy prior to being glassed over.
Eventually the outside of the joint is faired and glassed
over with as much glass as desired. A properly designed
composite joint should easily be stronger than the
panels connected to it. This is especially reassuring in
joints that will potentially take abuse like keels, stems,
and chines. 
You can also construct a composite chine over conven-
tional framework. Sheet plywood can be used with a
permanent stringer-frame support system to produce
strong, seaworthy hulls, and the simplified chine
system makes them easy to build.
There are endless variations for making up a properly
strong composite joint. We normally make up some
samples of the joint system that we plan to use and
290
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 24-10  A composite chine joint using fiberglass tape
over a low-density fillet. Finish the inside of the joint before
rounding over and finishing the outside.
Figure 24-11 A stitch-and-glue pram under construction.
Frames will hold the shape until stitching is complete. A
brace across the gunwales will hold the shape while the
hull is inverted and the interior joints are filleted and taped. 
Figure 24-12  A taped composite chine with conventional
stingers.
2 layers 
fiberglass tape
Epoxy/407 fillet
Electrical tie
Round over edge
Stringers form
a gutter
Glass tape or
tape and mat
Glass tape
over radius
Fiberglass tape

--- PAGE 305 ---
subject them to some simple destruction testing. Our
standard measure of a successful joint is that all breakage
occurs within the plywood rather than in the joint.
Final Fairing
Final fairing is the easiest part of hard chine plywood
construction. If you had a fair framework to begin with,
sheet ply should follow it precisely and make a smooth,
even surface. Most fairing will be concentrated around
chines, scarfs, and the keel, where two panels of plywood
have been joined. To fair a misaligned scarf, plane away
as little wood as possible and fill in low spots around
the joint with a low-density epoxy mixture. If the joint
is critical, reinforce weakened areas from the inside.
Before rounding over any joints at the chine or keel,
true up the plywood edges. Use hand planes and fairing
blocks with 50-grit sandpaper to sharpen each edge and
then sight it for fairness. If an edge has flat spots or
unnatural curves, do some corrective fairing. When you
have developed a fair edge along the entire keel or
chine, you can round it over with assurance that the
overall chine or keel surface will continue to look fair
after it is radiused.
The only limitations to the amount that you can round
over either a keel or chine joint are the structural limita-
tions of the joint itself. There have been cases where a
well-designed joint has failed because more material
was removed than was originally planned, leaving the
joint in weakened condition. If you have any doubts
about your particular joint, we suggest that you make
up a sample joint of exactly the kind you intend to use
and subject it to some simple destruction testing,
making sure the joint will be stronger than either of the
panels it is joining together. We generally make up a
sample of our intended joint that is approximately 8"
(200mm) long and subject it to whatever type of load
we can dream up. If these loads cause our sample to
break within the joint area, we build another sample,
increasing the joint size or re-engineering it with a
different concept until it is stronger than the panel itself
and all future breaks occur within the plywood and not
the joint.
Just as we use a stem cap piece in most boat hulls, with
hard chine construction it is also possible to have chine
caps and keel caps to help complete the rounding
process with certain types of joint design. (See Figure
24-4.) The procedure is the same as with a stem cap.
Plane a flat bevel on the chine or keel joint onto which
you can laminate a single piece or multiple pieces of
lumber stock. For temporary pressure, we normally use
steel screws that are removed after the bonding
adhesive has cured so as not to interfere with planing or
fairing operations.
Chapter 24 – Hard Chine Plywood Construction
291
Figure 24-13 Panel joints of a Fireball dinghy temporarily
held with wire. Fiberglass tape will be laid on the inside of
these joints and the wires will be removed. After fairing, fiber-
glass tape or cloth will be will be applied to the exterior of the
joints. (Photo by Mark Lindsay)
Figure 24-14 Interior of the dinghy shown in Figure 24-13.
Note the fiberglass tape joining the chines, visible in the
forward section. (Photo by Mark Lindsay)

--- PAGE 306 ---
Some problems can develop during fairing if you use
Douglas fir plywood. As explained earlier, sanded fir
plywood panels can be very uneven. Softer summer
wood sands more easily than harder winter wood, so
dishing results and becomes worse with more sanding.
The only solutions are to keep sanding to a minimum
and to use sharp hand planes for most of the fairing.
We suggest that all exterior fir plywood surfaces be
covered with fiberglass cloth and epoxy.
292
Hull Construction Methods

--- PAGE 307 ---
Most people are familiar with compounded plywood construction through kit boats. “Stitch-and-glue”
kayaks and small multihulls are the simplest forms. Compounded plywood construction dictates simpler
hull shapes but, with mastery, allows more sophisticated boats. It requires high quality plywood but
reduces or eliminates the need for other set-up and most materials.
In our early years as boatbuilders, we became particu-
larly fascinated with the concept of the Indian birch
bark canoe. American Indians designed, engineered,
and constructed these birch bark canoes, which were
the preferred method of transport by the early French
explorers for a period of over 200 years. Here was a
craft that was beautifully shaped, lightweight, and
strong. Best of all, it was of sheet material. The Indian
birch bark canoe was built in a way just opposite to
that in which boats are normally built: the skin was
formed first and the supporting framework installed
afterwards. Birch bark was first carefully removed from
a tree and roughly shaped into the form of a canoe. A
supporting framework was then installed to support the
flimsy birch bark skin and better define the shape of
the canoe. 
In 1963, we used a similar developed skin method,
using plywood instead of birch bark, to build a
trimaran. Following traditional techniques, we “folded
up” a hull and then installed interior framework to
stiffen it, to better define its shape, and to distribute
high loading throughout its skin. We have been
building boats this way for forty years now and have
refined the technique to the point where compounded
plywood construction is a practical method for a
limited range of hull types and shapes.
With this boatbuilding technique it is possible to
produce strong, lightweight hulls. We use it for catama-
rans and trimarans, but it is well suited to small day
sailors such as the International Moth Class dinghy. It
may be among the best techniques for building racing
canoes and rowing shells. Lofting, setting up, and
laminating are eliminated, so a boat can be manufac-
tured in relatively few work hours. One disadvantage of
compounded plywood construction is that its use is
limited to shapes which can be developed easily by
bending sheets of plywood in two directions. Another
problem is that it’s sometimes difficult to install frame-
work in a preformed hull. In spite of these disadvantages,
the method can be so successful that we think a discus-
sion of its basic principles is worthwhile.
Boat plans and design information for compounded
plywood construction can be hard to find. For this
reason, this chapter includes an outline of the various
Compounded Plywood Construction
C H A P T E R
25
Figure 25-1 Victor T, a lightweight, 25' (7.6m) C-class
trimaran, was built using compounded plywood technique.

--- PAGE 308 ---
design parameters we use in developing hull shapes and
instructions on designing and building models. If you
have purchased plans, begin with the specific techniques
for building described in the first portion of the chapter.
If you are developing your own compounded plywood
hull, however, read over the sections on design before
you start. In either case, the first step of any project
should be to make up samples for testing. Experiment
with keel joints and be sure that the plywood you have
chosen will be able to bend around the hull’s hardest
curves.
Compounding Plywood
To compound a sheet of plywood, you bend it in two
directions at the same time. All plywood can be
compounded, but as we will discuss later, the amount
of compounding possible for a given sheet of plywood
has not been firmly established. In general, the
“compoundability” of a panel is determined by its
thickness, by the number of plies used to make it, and
by the species of wood used. Plywood thickness is a
limiting factor in the size of the hulls that can be built
with compounded plywood construction. We have
used up to 1⁄4" (6mm) 5-ply panels and usually choose
the thickest plywood that can be bent to shape.
Different woods of the same thickness bend with varying
difficulty. Although different species of woods may be
used for compounded plywood construction, we almost
always choose the very best Okoume marine grade or
birch aircraft plywood. Each species has its pluses and
minuses; the important thing to consider with this
boatbuilding method is that flaws and voids within a
laminate may cause it to break when it is compounded.
High quality panels should therefore be used.
Construction
To begin building a compounded hull, make two
identical flat plywood panels. Each of these should be
slightly larger than one half of the hull skin, so it’s
usually necessary to scarf two or more 4'  8'
(1200mm  2400mm) sheets into a single piece.
Sometimes we have been able to lay out both panels 
on a single sheet by alternating them end for end.
Precoating plywood with WEST SYSTEM® epoxy increases
its stiffness and affects compounding. We precoat only
areas like the bow interior which will be difficult to reach
in the folded hull, and these only if little compounding
is required of them. Several of our compounded
plywood designs called for applying a layer of fiberglass
cloth to the outside of panels before folding them into
shape. As we discuss later in this chapter, fiberglass
sheathing increases stiffness significantly. Should you
decide to use this modification of the compounded
plywood technique, make both a model and a test
panel and check to be sure that it will be able to
negotiate the hull’s most severe curves.
The shape of a compounded hull is determined prima-
rily by its rocker profile, its keel angles, and its sheer
line, all of which are explained in greater detail in the
design section of this chapter. The amount of rocker cut
along the bottom of the panels where they join to form
the keel and the keel angles are the main factors in
294
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 25-2  Plywood panels for a Tornado catamaran. These
panels are cut from 5mm okoume plywood.

--- PAGE 309 ---
Chapter 25 – Compounded Plywood Construction
295
shaping the hull. The keel line cut establishes both the
rocker profile and the potential for compounding while
the keel angles describe hull fullness.
To understand the effects of these various lines, curves,
and angles, imagine what would happen if you joined
two panels, both of which had perfectly straight edges,
and bent them up. The result would be a cylindrical
structure with no compound curvature. If, however, 
the edges of both panels are curved and held in a
strong immobile joint at predetermined angles at the
keel, they will be forced to compound as they bend
towards each other.
Proper layout of the keel is crucial. The profile keel line
must be absolutely fair, with no humps, hollows, or flat
spots that might be magnified in the hull after the fold-
up process. The two panels must be exactly the same
size. To be sure that they are, staple or nail them
together and place them on a flat surface. Lay out a hull
side on the top panel and then cut the two panels
simultaneously. An alternative method is to lay out and
cut one panel and use it as a pattern for the second.
Scribe a line on the inside of each panel approximately
2" (50mm) up from the center keel joint. These lines
will serve as guides later when the exact centerline of
the keel is lost under the composite keel joint. The lines
also help to make sure that the keel is applied evenly to
both panels.
The next step on most hulls is to separate the panels
and install a sheer clamp on each one. The sheer
clamp, which is eventually an interior member of some
hulls and an exterior member of others, provides
rigidity to the upper part of the plywood panel. This is
the only time during construction when it can be
conveniently installed. Sheer clamp dimensions are
usually a function of the thickness of the plywood: we
generally use sheer clamps that are four to six times the
plywood thickness to gain sufficient surface area for
bonding the deck to the hull. The sheer line edge deter-
mines the placement of the sheer clamps. We usually
leave ours slightly high of the plywood edges so that
there will be enough stock for any beveling which
might be needed for deck crown.
Bond a sheer clamp on each panel and staple lightly to
hold it temporarily in place. Too many staples will
increase the stiffness of the piece, so use clamps if
further pressure is necessary. While the epoxy is still
wet, curve each panel in a longitudinal arc with the
sheer clamp on the inside radius, even if it will eventu-
ally be on the outside of the hull. This forces a bit of a
laminated curve into the two wood parts and helps to
promote compounding in the plywood by compressing
it along the sheer line. When the adhesive has cured,
plane the sheer clamps so they will meet perfectly
where the plywood panels touch at the bow. If the hull
is double-ended, also bevel them at the stern as shown
in Figure 25-14.
Round over and bevel the plywood panels along the
keel line and stern edge. It’s almost impossible for two
sharp edges to mate accurately and they will not line up
if they are left sharp. By rounding the edges you increase
surface area, and this makes it easier to adjust the panels
for an accurate centerline. Before beginning, however,
decide how you will temporarily hold the panels together
until you can make a permanent keel joint. The technique
you choose here will determine whether you shape the
interior or the exterior panel edges.
We have used two reliable temporary holding systems,
both of which act as hinges along the joint. With the
first, we thread wire through holes along the keel line;
with the second, we bond 2" (50mm) wide nylon
webbing to the outside of the panels along the joint.
Whichever system you use, first clamp, staple, or tape
the panels together so that they will not shift as you
align them. Double-sided carpet tape will effectively
hold them and will become an important part of the
Figure 25-3 Plywood panels and sheer clamps laminated to a
large curve to help develop fullness in the upper sheer area of
the completed hull.

--- PAGE 310 ---
296
Hull Construction Methods
nylon webbing system. If you use tape, however, apply
it to a clean surface and be sure to remove any adhesive
residue as soon as the webbing is firmly in place. Wash
any surfaces to which tape has been attached with
solvent and then sand them.
Nylon webbing, similar to seat belt material, maintains
better panel alignment than wire, especially around the
stem area, and usually eliminates the task of straight-
ening panel edges. To install it, round the inner edges
of the plywood to a 1⁄16" (1mm) radius and bevel a 45°
angle from the curved area to the outer surface. Join the
panels, interior surfaces facing, along the stem and keel
lines with carpet tape, clamp slightly, and check align-
ment. Bond the webbing to the outside of the keel joint
with a thickened mixture of 406 Colloidal Silica and
epoxy, holding it in place with spring clamps until the
epoxy cures. Do not substitute fiberglass cloth tape for
the webbing since fiberglass cloth is too brittle when
wet with epoxy to be used in this application. Webbing
could be difficult to work with on asymmetrical hulls.
To use wires to hold the panels, lay out wiring holes
along the keel line and bow (also the stern if the hull is
a double-ender). These holes should usually be about
1⁄8" (3mm) in diameter, 3⁄8" (9mm) to 1⁄2" (12mm) in from
the edges of the plywood, and about 4" (100mm) apart.
The holes on the two panels should be perfectly
aligned, so double check them before drilling. Next,
shape the inside facing edges. The easiest way to do this
is to stack the pieces on top of one another, clamp
them, and round them both in one operation. Then
place the panels on top of each with the interiors face-
to-face. Cut No. 12 ground wire or other lightweight
copper wire to about 5" (130mm) lengths, thread a
piece through each set of holes, bend it around, and
twist the ends loosely together as in Figure 25-5. Leave
enough slack so that the wire will not dig into the
wood when the panels are spread apart. We usually
wire panels together along the keel to the top of the
bow at the sheer line, but occasionally we leave the
bow open at this stage to help develop more fullness
along the keel line in that area. If you are building a
double-ender, also wire or tape the stern.
When the panels are wired or held together with
webbing, set them upright and begin opening them like
a book. To distribute the weight of the panels evenly
and better control the process, place sawhorses under
the keel about one quarter of the hull length in from
each end. Cut some sticks to length and insert them
between the sheer clamps to hold the panels apart (see
Figure 25-6) and then measure the keel angle between
the panels. As you spread the panels, clamp braces
from the sawhorses to the sheer clamps on either side
to make the unwieldy structure more manageable.
There usually isn’t much stability at this point—the
panels are very wobbly.
We usually measure angles at three distinct parts of the
keel line and let the rest of the hull fall fair between
Figure 25-4  Joining plywood hull panels with nylon webbing.
Figure 25-5 Joining plywood hull panels with wire.
Plywood panels spread
to desired angle
2" wide nylon webbing
bonded with epoxy 
and colloidal silica mixture
Drill 1⁄8"
holes for
copper 
tie wires
Bring plywood panels
together for tying
with wire
Tape
Keep wires loose
enough to allow
plywood panels
to spread out
to keel angle
Chamfer edge of panels
to aid in alignment
Thoroughly clean all
tape residue and sand
inner keel area
Radius & bevel
edge of plywood

--- PAGE 311 ---
Chapter 25 – Compounded Plywood Construction
297
them. In the bow area, for example, we may work
towards an 80° keel angle, while in the midsection we
might want an angle of 140°, and perhaps even 160°
toward the transom. Three checking stations seem to be
accurate for boats up to about 30' (9m) long.
One way to make sure that the two panels meet at the
desired angle is build a simple jig or temporary frame
support. (See Figure 25-7.) This clamps to the exterior
part of the hull and forces the two panels into the exact
position you want. If you have three checking stations,
make up three jigs, one for each position. Often,
plywood doesn’t lie flat as it is spread. Instead, it curls
slightly inward and a straightedge shows a hollow on
the outside of the panel. This means that if your jig is
set for 120°, the plywood at the keel may only be
spread to 110°. The solution is to spread the sheers
further than 120° apart until the panels are at the
correct angle at the keel. Remember that the permanent
joint will be made at the keel, and it is only this angle
which is crucial at this stage.
When the two panels are spread to desired angles,
begin tightening the wires, if you are using them, until
the edges are drawn tightly together and centered with
a relatively straight keel line. If you have used webbing
along the keel line, this step is eliminated. At this stage,
wires may tend to pull away from each other at the keel
line and leave gaps of up to 3⁄8" (9mm). Lightly tap each
wire with a sharp tool and drive it into a V in the joint.
As you do this, try to put your tool exactly in the
middle of the wire between the two panels because an
exact, accurate V promotes good alignment when you
pull the pieces together. Twist each wire again until the
edges are snug at the keel line.
During the tightening process, if one edge of a panel
seems a little higher than the other, use finger or thumb
pressure to hold the edges in alignment until they butt
Figure 25-6 Tornado catamaran hull panels are held at the
correct angle with notched sticks and a plywood form.
Figure 25-7  Panels for a trimaran outrigger hull showing
temporary frame supports.
Figure 25-8 Tightening wires at the keel joint.
Plywood panels spread out to designed angle
Tighten loose wires by pushing
down on the center here
or
Tighten by further
twisting here

--- PAGE 312 ---
snugly. In some cases you can force wires to the left or
right as you twist them to assist in raising or lowering
one panel edge against the other. The goal of this final
tightening is to snug the plywood panels against each
other and to line them up so that there will be no
humps and hollows along the keel line.
Occasionally, wire ties may be mutilated to the point
where you lose control of the plywood edges around
them. The best solution to this problem is to snip these
wires, remove them, start over with fresh ties, and hope
for better luck. Drill more holes and insert extra wires
in areas that are particularly difficult. If you have further
trouble, it’s more than likely that you did not put enough
radius on your edges and/or that a hump or hollow on
a panel edge is throwing alignment out of kilter.
Constructing the Keel Joint
When the keel edges of the plywood panels are in
position and any wires tightened, begin the process of
building a keel joint. We recommend that you plan to
manufacture the keel in a single day as this will elimi-
nate sanding between layers.
The composite keel joint is one of the most critical
parts of a compounded plywood hull. Although the size
and composition of keel joints vary from hull to hull,
basic installation procedure is very similar. Begin by
filling the V formed by the two panels at the interior
keel line with a fillet of thickened epoxy, lay in fiber-
glass cloth or tape, and apply more epoxy and fiberglass
cloth. The epoxy structurally joins the panels and, at
the same time, serves as a core between the inner and
outer layers of fiberglass.
There are no firm rules for the thickness and width of
composite keels, but the fillet should at least cover
protruding wires if you are using them so that you can
evenly apply the glass over a smooth surface. The size
of a keel joint, and especially its width, has a significant
effect on the shape of the finished hull, and it is a
rather rigid part of the structure, which for the most
part will not bend. If it is irregular, larger in some areas
than in others, it may cause bumps and hollows.
Variation of around 10% in the keel section is tolerable,
but any more than this will lead to unfairness in the
hull. (See Figure 25-9.) 
To apply the initial keel joint fillet, add low-density
filler to epoxy to make a mixture that spreads easily but
resists sagging. Apply it as smoothly and evenly as
possible. The scribed lines on the interior of the panels
aid in maintaining a balanced fillet as well as in laying
the tape straight. Since leaning over the edges of the
spread-out panels to reach the middle of the hull can
be a bit difficult, we make several paddles, each resem-
bling the keel shapes we want at a given part of the
hull, and use them to remove any excess adhesive and
to smooth the joint.
Apply fiberglass cloth tape over the fillet when the
thickened epoxy mixture has partially cured. If you
wait until the epoxy has fully cured, you will have to
sand before applying fiberglass. Catching the fillet while
it is still pliable and malleable means that you can
simply smooth potential rough edges with layers of
glass cloth.
In manufactured keels, we usually use 9 oz (305g/m2)
fiberglass cloth tape. This is available in various widths;
we keep a supply of 2", 3", 4", and 5" (50mm, 75mm,
100mm, and 125mm) rolls on hand for building
various sizes of keels. We typically install two layers of
tape on both the inner and outer keel surfaces of hulls
built with 5⁄32" to 1⁄4" (4mm to 6mm) plywood. Like the
298
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 25-9 Building a composite keel joint.
Circular plywood
paddle for shaping
the keel fillet
Thickened epoxy 
keel fillet. Make the 
fillet large enough to 
cover any exposed tie wires
and keep the fillet fair and
even from end to end.
Extending fiberglass
tape farther from 
the centerline will 
add fullness to the
underbody by stiffening
the plywood 
panels.
Keep epoxy 
off area outside 
of the fiberglass tape 
as epoxy will stiffen the 
plywood and can cause unfair
spots in the folded hull.
Wet out fiberglass tape and
carefully position it on the keel.
Keep epoxy and tape evenly
spaced on each side
of the keel
centerline.

--- PAGE 313 ---
width of the keel joint, the width of the glass tape influ-
ences the shape of the folded hull. Wider glass cloth
adds stiffness to the plywood, and this keeps it from
bending as much as it would if it were not covered with
glass. As a result, the hull is fuller along the keel line
and more compounding is demanded of the panels.
There are at least two ways to apply the fiberglass tape.
You can install it dry, pressing it into the partially cured
keel and then wetting it out with a stiff brush and
unthickened epoxy, but this can be a lengthy operation
because of the awkward working posture. Since it’s
difficult to maneuver a squeegee from this angle, the
dry method may also result in a little extra weight, and
you might want to avoid this on a small boat. It’s much
more convenient to wet out a measured length of glass
tape on a board which has been wrapped in plastic,
remove excess epoxy with a plastic spreader, and then
roll up the tape. Transfer it to the keel, unroll it in
position, and smooth it out. Applying glass tape in the
bow and other confined areas can be troublesome, so
use the wet method in these spots.
To apply fiberglass cloth to the keel joint of a large boat,
you may have to work out a slightly different proce-
dure. A hull is very fragile until the keel has cured, so
you can’t get inside it to lay the tape. Instead, rig up a
scaffold on which you can stand. Run a stick that is at
least a foot longer than the widest point of the hull
through the center of a roll of glass tape and rest its
ends on the sheers. If the hole in the center of the tape
is too small for the stick, form a wire coat hanger into a
U-shaped holder, bending the ends of the wire into
hooks so it can hang from the stick. Find a second
stick—this one should reach the keel easily from the
outside of the boat—and fasten a brush to it. We use
the stiff, 2" (50mm) wide brushes that are sold for
cleaning automobile parts. Roll dry fiberglass tape onto
the keel line and use the long brush to wet it out
completely with epoxy.
No matter how you apply the fiberglass, closely watch
the guidelines up from the keel as you work. Position
the tape evenly on the panels because it will affect stiff-
ness. If you are applying several layers of cloth, arrange
them in an overlapping pattern so that their edges will
be feathered. If you are using various tape widths, lay
the widest first. Carefully control the epoxy since it too
increases stiffness. Again, use the marks as guides, and
keep the epoxy lines equally spaced from the center of
the keel.
Folding Up
When the keel and glass tape have fully cured, the
plywood will be folded into the shape of the hull. A
Chapter 25 – Compounded Plywood Construction
299
Figure 25-10  Applying glass tape over a keel fillet on a 30'
(9.1m) hull.
Figure 25-11 Applying fiberglass tape to the composite keel
of a large hull.
Brush fastened to stick to
wet out fiberglass tape
Support
notched to
proper keel
angle
Alternate tape holder

--- PAGE 314 ---
deck jig—usually nothing more than an outline of the
deck perimeter from the top view—is necessary for this
operation. Although deck jigs are usually temporary, in
some designs they remain in the finished boat. In the
main hulls of some trimarans, for example, a jig
becomes an underwing panel, as shown in Figure 25-
12. In these cases, the design and material used for
deck jigs may be somewhat different, but their primary
function is not.
Make the jig with a lip that slips over the edges of the
sheer clamps when the hull is folded. This lip will hold
the sheer clamps in their final positions. The jig is
absolutely crucial to folding-up and must be accurately
built. Fortunately, this doesn’t require much time or
material.
We usually design our deck jigs with a 1' (300mm)
wide plywood flange around the outer perimeter to
serve as a sheer web separating two structural stringers.
The inside stringer is more important because it is used
to define the actual sheer profile, while the other
stringer serves only as a structural member to help
support the deck jig fixture. Manufacture one half of
the deck jig first, and then duplicate it by making an
identical half. To determine jig measurements, loft the
topside sheer profile on the floor, using perhaps four to
eight measurement points from the centerline for
guides. Find stock that will bend accurately to a fair
and even curve, and scarf it to form a stringer of appro-
priate size. This will be the permanent inner part of one
half of the deck jig, so don’t use a good lofting batten.
Bond and staple foot-wide plywood panels to the top of
the stringer, butting them as necessary. Leave some
plywood overhanging.
Then bond and staple another stringer to the underside
of the outer edge of the plywood. This piece should be
about as thick as the inner stringer but doesn’t have to
be made of quality stock. Lift the whole assembly from
the floor, saw off the plywood overhang at the inner
stringer, and plane it flush. Make a copy of this half-jig,
using it as a guide. For accuracy, we suggest that you
tack the inner batten to the permanent sheer edge of
the first assembly rather than to the lofting. Fasten
plywood and an outer stringer as you did on the first.
Next, join the two halves of the jig with cross ties.
These hold the pieces rigidly, help position them
correctly, and prevent any spreading in the middle of
the jig. The cross ties rest on the sheers of the plywood
panels and keep the jig from dropping down on the
hull, but they tend to get in the way of interior work so
use as few as possible. In most cases, four is the
minimum.
Getting this unwieldy hunk of joined plywood panels
inserted into the deck jig is the most difficult part of
compounded plywood construction and requires
patience, skill, and many workers. With smaller hulls, a
few people can start working the two plywood panels
into the deck jig by folding the two panels up toward
each other. Fold the bows together and insert the deck
jig over the folded-up bow to hold that part of the hull
in position. The fold-up team then works its way aft,
slowly pushing the two side panels toward each other
so that the lip of the jig is able to slip into position over
the edge of the sheer, firmly locking the two panels.
The problem with this fold-up method is that several
other people must also help support the deck jig until
it is positioned on the hull. The hull also needs a few
300
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 25-12 Typical deck jig and typical underwing panel.
Temporary Deck Jig
Underwing Panels
Serving as a Deck Jig
Plywood Web
Inner Stringer
Outer Stringer
Cross Ties
Underwing Panels
Inner Stringer
Outer Stringer
Temporary Cross Ties

--- PAGE 315 ---
more people to help support it because as it is being
folded up, the bracing that was giving support is no
longer effective because of the shape change. Once you
have positioned the deck jig, the troubles are over
because the once floppy hull becomes quite rigid and
stable. Position temporary supports from the floor to
the deck jig to hold the newly-shaped hull firmly for
further work.
Another way to fold panels is to use the plastic strap-
ping and clips that have been developed to replace
metal strapping in packing and shipping. Loop a series
of these straps around the hull about 2' (600mm) apart
down its length, arranging them so that you have easy
access to the clips. Force the sheer inward and take up
on the strap. Work up and down the hull, tightening
each a little at a time, gradually increasing the tension.
The boat will slowly and gently fold up until eventually
two people will be able to drop the deck jig in place.
Things will look bad until the jig is installed, so don’t
be discouraged. With the jig in position, remove the
straps and begin work on the interior.
Chapter 25 – Compounded Plywood Construction
301
Figure 25-13  Folding up with plastic strapping or belts.
Figure 25-14  Folding up a 30' trimaran hull with drawstrings.
Note that the sheer clamps have been beveled at the stern so
they can be clamped together when the hull is folded up.
Place belts 2' apart
Gradually tighten belts
Place deck jig
over sheer
Secure deck jig and
remove straps

--- PAGE 316 ---
Although strapping is better in most applications,
especially with larger hulls and masts, you can also use
light line to pull a hull into shape. Fasten screws into
both sheers every 2' or so down the hull, setting the
heads out far enough so you can wrap the line around
them. Thread a drawstring around two screws, one on
either sheer, and tie it with a rolling hitch. Tighten the
stringers up and down the hull by pulling on the knots
with steady and progressive pressure.
Supporting the Compounded Plywood Skin
Every hull needs some form of minimal framework to
distribute high load points over the hull skin, and the
framework systems that we have used to accomplish
load distribution have varied widely. Smaller boats,
such as the 18' (5.5m) Unicorn catamaran, rely on only
three bulkheads and several stringers to distribute loads
out over the 5⁄32" (4mm) plywood skin, sufficient
reinforcement for a long-lasting hull. As boats get
larger, however, they need more support for the skin
because the loads are increasing dramatically while the
plywood thickness may only increase a small amount,
for example, from 3⁄16" to 1⁄4" (5mm to 6mm).
Another factor that affects the amount of framework
needed for skin support is the stiffness of the skins
themselves. If you improve the stiffness of the skin, less
framework is needed. Coating the ply panels inside and
out with WEST SYSTEM epoxy will improve skin stiffness
a great deal. A step beyond this is to laminate 4 oz to
12 oz (135g/m2-410g/m2) glass cloth on both the inside
and outside of the developed plywood hull. Although
302
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 25-15 Taping a keel fillet with the hull in temporary
frame supports (left). A folded hull with a deck jig in place
over the sheer (right).
Figure 25-17  Struts and bracing for sub-level stringers in 
a Tornado catamaran hull. Note the small plywood gussets
holding the struts to the stringers. Small plywood half frames
are being installed against the hull skin. These frames will 
be filleted to the skin. The centerboard case is the vertical
structure in the middle of the hull.
Figure 25-16  A folded 30' hull with sub-level stringers
laminated on the inside.

--- PAGE 317 ---
the addition of glass cloth will increase the weight of
the hull significantly, chances are you will find that the
hull skin is incredibly light, at this point probably not
comprising any more than 50% of the completed
weight of your hull. Thus, you may well be able to
afford the extra weight. 
The main benefit of using glass cloth to stiffen the
plywood hull panels is that it applies easily and quickly
with effective results. Applying glass cloth on both the
inner and outer hull surfaces is especially effective with
3-ply plywood because it produces a 5-ply matrix after
the plywood skins have been formed, increasing strength
and stiffness significantly. When using glass, apply it
only to the interior of the hull at this stage, leaving the
outside to be glassed after the interior is completed and
the hull can be removed from the deck jig and turned
upside down. With the hull in that position, the outside
layer of glass cloth is much easier to apply.
Another method to stiffen all or part of a plywood skin
is to treat the developed hull as a mold and use it as a
form over which to laminate veneers or more plywood.
You can do this either on the inside or outside of the
hull skin, but it is probably more easily and effectively
done on the outside if the whole hull is to be covered.
Another interesting method that we have used is to
laminate a honeycomb material on the inside of the
compounded plywood hull, using a thickened epoxy
mixture for bonding. We then cover the honeycomb
with a layer of 12 oz (410g/m2) glass cloth to complete
a sandwich panel which has a high degree of panel stiff-
ness at a very light weight. The only difficulty with this
approach is determining how best to distribute high
load points over the interior of the hull skin with the
honeycomb in place. In the case of the trimaran outer
hulls shown in Figure 25-18, there were very few high
load points involved, so they were a natural for this
type of skin support. The beauty of the system in this
instance is that the honeycomb and the 12 oz glass
cloth were easily installed on the interior with few labor
hours and resulted in a skin that needed no further
support.
Before installing any framework or doing any stiffening
of the skin, make sure you are satisfied with the exact
shape that the hull has taken. If not, you can easily
make some modification of the shape at this point. For
example, you can squeeze the hull in at various points
or push it out at other points with temporary braces or
supports. The interior structure that you then build in
must be capable of holding these altered hull shape
positions without losing any hull fairness after you
remove the supports. At this point, you’re down to
“eyeball” boatbuilding because you have no body plan
or given set of dimensions to go from. If you are
building a hull you designed yourself, there are several
parameters that you can establish early in the game as
goals to shoot for in developing a given hull shape.
These will be discussed later. If you are building from
plans (for example, a Tornado catamaran), there is
usually no guide to determine final hull shape other
than the initial instructions for construction.
Interestingly enough, however, the variation between
hulls built by different builders (as shown by the class
measuring templates) is surprisingly small in the
Olympic class Tornado.
Chapter 25 – Compounded Plywood Construction
303
Figure 25-18 Bonding resin-coated paper honeycomb panels
to the inside of a folded plywood hull. Sticks are providing
clamping pressure by forcing the honeycomb against both sides
of the hull. When this laminate has cured, 12 oz fiberglass
cloth was bonded to the interior side of the honeycomb core.

--- PAGE 318 ---
Bulkheads, Frames, and Deck Beams
As in other methods of boat construction, bulkheads
are used in compounded plywood construction as a
major tool to distribute high loads over the skin area.
With the fold-up method, we use bulkheads regularly
to distribute high stresses caused by cross beams,
masts, forestays, centerboards, and staying points
throughout the skin.
Because there are no lofted sections to go by, you need
to determine the shape of the bulkheads by making up
temporary patterns that can be fit to the hull and then
used as templates to cut out the bulkheads. Make the
patterns by fitting a piece of template material to each
side of the hull. Join these two half pieces together with
a brace at the top and an overlap or brace at the bottom
to form a complete interior pattern of the hull at a
given station. Trace the pattern on a piece of plywood
and cut out the plywood to form the bulkhead. You
will probably need some final fitting of the bulkhead,
but if you used the template system carefully, this
should be minimal. (See Chapter 26 for more detail.)
304
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 25-19  Structural members are installed in a 30’
trimaran outrigger. One of the crossbeam arms and the
centerboard case are braced and secured with the bulkheads
and sub-level stringers in the foreground.
Figure 25-20 Bulkheads are reinforcing laminated stilts to
which crossbeams will be bonded.
Figure 25-21  Laminated frames, a box-type bulkhead, and
shelf and bunk bottoms all support the developed plywood
skin on this 35' (10.6m) racing trimaran.

--- PAGE 319 ---
Install the bulkheads by using a simple fillet on each
side of the plywood to join it with the hull sides.
Usually, we add low-density filler to the epoxy to make
a lightweight fillet that provides a large bonding surface
area between bulkhead and hull skin. You can further
support the skin by laminating in place ribs manufac-
tured of thin strips of wood, which will bend easily
around the hull. Stack laminate the wood strips on top
of one another, using alloy staples that can be left in the
laminate.
Another method for skin support is to cut and fit
plywood web frames and fillet them in place, using the
same technique used to install bulkheads and plywood
frames. (See Figure 25-17.) In some situations, stringers
might be needed to give further longitudinal support.
We install stringers by holding them temporarily in
place with staples and cross-braces until the adhesive
cures. When stapling through the skin from the outside
to the stringer, we drill small holes to transfer the inside
stringer location as a guide to stapling. It is also possible
to install stringers on the undeveloped plywood panels
before they are folded up. We do not recommend that
stringers over 1⁄2" (12mm) wide be installed on the
unfolded panels because wider stringers will tend to
cause hard spots and overly stress the plywood in that
area during the bending process.
Depending upon the hull being built, you may have
many other interior items to install. These might
include centerboard or daggerboard cases, special
compartments, and, in larger hulls, interior accommo-
dations. You can install some interior items after the
hull has been removed from the deck jig; however, you
must install large items now because the deck beams
that are needed to hold the sheer in final position will
be in the way later.
The deck beams are always the last items that you
install in the hull before removing the deck jig. Deck
beams serve an important function at this stage by
supporting the upper hull area so that it will not change
shape when you remove the deck jig. There are various
combinations we have used to make successful deck
beams. Generally, we use small leftover pieces of proper
width plywood to construct them. The I-beam deck
section (as shown in Figure 25-26) is very easy to
Chapter 25 – Compounded Plywood Construction
305
Figure 25-22 A variety of framing, bulkheads, and interior
joinery is employed in supporting the plywood skin in this 35’
trimaran.
Figure 25-23  A bunk bottom and laminated frames are used
to support this hull skin.
Figure 25-24  Deck beams being installed in a Tornado hull.
Note the notches for a stringer along the centerline.

--- PAGE 320 ---
install and provides the maximum amount of load-
bearing support available per weight of deck beam.
Usually deck beam failures are not so much material
failures as they are failures of the joint where the deck
beam meets the sheer clamp area. The I-beam deck
beam system provides the maximum amount of
bonding area at this joint and can eliminate this
problem. Simple plywood deck beams are adequate in
many situations, provided they have enough depth so
that they won’t break in tension. In addition, the point
at which they join with the sheer clamp and hull skin
area should provide enough area that you can install a
generous fillet to make a proper joint. Because the sheer
clamps with this type of construction are fairly small,
we have stayed away from any heavy triangular
notching of the deck beams into the sheer clamps.
When the deck beams are installed and the interior
support completed, you no longer need the deck jig.
Remove it and turn the now-rigid hull upside down.
Strip off keel webbing if you’ve used it. If you’ve used
wires, you can snip them flush, but we find that
extracting them makes fairing easier.
Fairing and Finishing
As a rule, there is little fairing to do on the exterior
surface of the hull because plywood naturally
compounds into an amazingly fair surface if you have
done a good job of joining the panels. Usually the only
real fairing is at the keel line itself where it is common
to have some small misalignment between the plywood
edges that causes some minor humps and hollows. You
can fair up the keel quickly with a combination
approach of filling low spots and planing off some high
spots. Try not to plane down into the composite keel;
leave the point where the two pieces of plywood meet
to act as a guide for fairing the keel straight. When you
have trued-up the keel line and stem, you can then
round over the keel to whatever radius you want.
When the keel and stem are fair and radiused as
desired, apply a minimum of two layers of 9 oz
(305g/m2) glass cloth tape over the outside keel area.
This glass cloth completes the structural composite keel
and also provides abrasion resistance along the keel line
when the boat is pulled up on the beach (a situation
common with most lightweight multihulls). To apply
glass cloth tape on the exterior keel line surface, wet
306
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 25-25 Trimaran outrigger deck framing of plywood
beams and spruce stringers.
Figure 25-26 Tension flanges for deck I-beams are bonded 
to the underside of the sheer clamp. Sheer webs for deck 
I-beams will be bonded to the top of these flanges. They will
look like the deck beams in Figure 25-24.

--- PAGE 321 ---
out the surface first with a light coating of epoxy. Apply
the glass tape dry, firmly setting it in position in the
epoxy. Then wet out the glass tape by adding more
epoxy, either with a roller or by pouring it on the
surface from a cup and smoothing it out with a plastic
squeegee. We usually wait for the keel line taping to
cure completely and then file or sand the glass tape
edges as smooth as possible. We then attempt to fair
them with putty, using low-density filler. If the exterior
surface is to be covered with a layer of glass cloth, we
wait to do this puttying operation until after we have
applied the fiberglass cloth. Other areas of the hull may
also need fairing. These could include the scarf joints
and any hollows that may have developed.
The final stage of hull completion is the fairing of the
deck beams and installation of other deck structural
items such as longitudinal stringers. (See Chapter 27.)
Design Guidelines for Model Building
The process of designing compounded plywood hulls is
not very scientific. In fact, it’s probably more a combi-
nation of art and common sense than anything else.
Because the compounded plywood method promotes
graceful shapes, we haven’t seen any really bad hulls
built using it, but that’s about the only encouraging
word we can offer.
The limitations of the compounded plywood system
demand high length-to-beam ratios—20-to-1 is not
uncommon—and high prismatic coefficients with no
sharp curves. These factors add up to hulls that drive
easily through the water. The real design problems lie in
achieving enough displacement for a given hull length,
reducing the wetted surface to an acceptable minimum,
and arranging displacement throughout the hull for a
sea-kindly and maneuverable boat which sits correctly
on its lines when fully loaded. With compounded
plywood construction, you can’t always build what you
draw, so including all of these design considerations in
drawings is particularly complicated.
For centuries, model building has been an alternative to
designing boats on paper. Nathaniel Herreshoff refined
the technique, carefully shaping, testing, and reshaping
models until he was satisfied with a design and then
taking the lines off the models for lofting. We use models
for developing compounded plywood hulls because at
this point in the development of the boatbuilding
method, it appears to be the only practical way to
achieve accuracy.
By designing and building models on a scale of 1" to
the foot (1⁄12th scale), we have been able to project our
results accurately from the model phase up to full size
with very little error. We have built many models of a
given design, slightly changing various parameters of
each model hull until we finally achieved exactly what
we wanted. We then transferred the dimensions of the
model to paper and expanded it up to where we could
construct the full size version easily. Because of the
Chapter 25 – Compounded Plywood Construction
307
Figure 25-27 Construction on outriggers for a 35' trimaran.
These hulls will now be coated and fiberglassed. See Chapters
13 and 15.
Figure 25-28
A Tornado catamaran folded up and inserted
into the deck jig. The exterior keel has been faired and taped
with fiberglass.

--- PAGE 322 ---
limited hull shapes available with this system, the
design work needed isn’t really as complicated as you
might think. Because the confines are narrow and there
are only a few variations available, it usually doesn’t
take very much model building to discover the scope of
variables involved. It is helpful to understand the
concept of developable surfaces, however. A high
school textbook on sheet metal development is worth
studying because the basic concepts discussed there are
closely related to developing compounded plywood.
Your first step is to decide the basic parameters for the
hull you are going to design and build. That decision
involves the amount of displacement that is needed.
For a given length of boat, there is a limit to the
amount of displacement that you can achieve by
compounding plywood. You may find out, for instance,
that you need a displacement value of 700 pounds
(315kg) for the hull and you plan to build a boat 20'
(6m) long. However, you may later find out that you
are only able to get 500 pounds (225kg) of displace-
ment within that length and the extra 200 pounds
(90kg) may require that the boat be 22' or 23' (6.7m or
7m) long. Another factor affecting this decision is the
thickness of plywood to be used. Quarter-inch (6mm)
plywood cannot be bent as much as 1⁄8" or 5⁄32" (3mm or
4mm) plywood and will reduce your displacement
potential accordingly. A second decision concerns
where the displacement is to be located along the hull.
Do you want to have a lot of reserve displacement aft?
Do you want fine bows or full bows, and how much
reserve displacement will you need higher up in the
bow area?
We continue to be amazed at the amount of compound-
ing and the variety of shapes that we are able to extract
from plywood panels. At this point, we can only give
results of the amount of compounding that we were
actually able to get on specific hulls that we have built
in the past. To measure this compounding rate, we have
determined the amount of compounding that takes
place within a given 8'  1' span at about midpoint
along the hull. (Figure 25-29 gives these results.)
Once you have established the basic parameters for
your hull, make a rough sketch of the shape and the
profile of the hull you envision. This rough drawing is
the catalyst to start the modeling process. The object is
to begin the development of two model plywood panels
that, when joined together in the proper method, fold
up to form a close resemblance to the hull that you
envision. An understanding of developable shapes will
aid at this point in developing your first plywood panel
cutout from your rough drawing.
The tricky part here is to establish lines on a flat panel
which will, when the panel is compounded, produce
the boat you want. As we mentioned earlier, the rocker
profile, or side view of the boat, the keel angles, and
the sheer line ultimately define the hull shape.
Generally, on hulls with full afterbodies and transoms,
the rocker profile in the flat panel is very similar to the
keel profile when the hull is folded. For a given amount
308
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 25-29   Compounding rates on Gougeon-constructed hulls.
Boat name
Longitudinal bending (inches
maximum over 8 feet)
Athwartship bending (inches
maximum over 1 foot)
Plywood thickness
Length of
hull in feet
VICTOR T (main hull)
25
3-ply (5 mm)
11⁄2
3⁄4
VICTOR T (outriggers)
17
3-ply (3 mm)
2
5⁄8
ADAGIO (main hull)
35
3-ply (6 mm)
7⁄8
1
ADAGIO (outriggers)
33
3-ply (6 mm)
13⁄8
11⁄8
FLICKA (outriggers)
30
5-ply (7 mm)
17⁄16
1
A CLASS CATAMARAN 
18
3-ply (3 mm)
3
1⁄2
SPLINTER (main hull)
25
3-ply (6 mm)
11⁄4
1
OUTRIGGER CANOE
24 
3-ply (4 mm)
11⁄2
2
OLLIE1 (main hull)
35
5-ply (7 mm)
17⁄16
1
1Outside of panels sheathed in 4oz. fiberglass cloth before folding.

--- PAGE 323 ---
of rocker, a double-ended hull will have more keel
rocker than a hull with a fuller afterbody, so on double-
enders you can usually cut more keel rocker to achieve
the desired amount of rocker in the completed hull.
(See Figure 25-30.) Bow and transom profiles are pretty
straightforward because the flat cut shape is very close
to the compounded profile, except that the very tip of
the bow will move aft slightly when the hull sheers are
spread apart. You may have to work with the model a
little and compensate for this to end up with the bow
or transom you want.
The sheer line can be more difficult to determine than
the keel line. The profile of a sheer line scribed on a flat
sheet of plywood may be considerably different from the
sheer line on a folded hull. The sheer on the completed
hull is affected by many variables, including hull width,
Chapter 25 – Compounded Plywood Construction
309
Figure 25-30  Developing hull rocker in a plywood panel layout.
Figure 25-31  Developing the sheer in a plywood panel layout.
At section 3 the hull with fuller after body will have a
greater girth measurement than the hull with slack bilges.
The greater girth “F” will require a flat panel with more rocker
along the keel profile than will girth “S”.
Flat panel for hull with transom and straight sheer
Straighter sheer would increase measurement
around girth and should be added to panel.
Reference line
Reference line
Flat panel with station lines
and reference lines.
Curved sheer
Panel layout for straighter sheer
Reference line
Reference
line

--- PAGE 324 ---
hull fullness, and the amount of compounding within
the structure. It will usually require some adjustment to
make up for curvature at the hull’s midsection. Take all
of these factors into account when determining the
ultimate sheer line. Remember that the sheer line must
curve evenly over its length, with no hollows or flat
spots.
For basic clues on the sheer profile and height, look at
the profile view and a reasonably drawn version of the
body plan. The aft and midsections of a hull usually
demand more curve from the plywood, and the sheer is
usually therefore higher at the bow, where the sections
are much straighter. To develop a straight sheer line,
add material in the midsection as shown in Figure 25-31
to make up for the curve there. Measure along the
anticipated hull profile at each station to determine
how much extra plywood is needed and add this to the
mid-sheer section of the layout. Then cut the panels for
the first model.
Building the Model
The first model is usually only a rough attempt to
achieve the hull you desire and will serve as a guideline
for refinements that can be made with the next model.
This first model will also give you a much better under-
standing of the compounded plywood hull development
process. We have always built our models on a scale of
1" to the foot because we have learned by experience
which thicknesses of plywood we can use for the model
that will scale up with reasonable accuracy to full size.
We have used the following thicknesses of aircraft birch
plywood purchased from aircraft supply houses. These
thicknesses seem to be universally available.
Scales to these full size panels
Aircraft birch plywood
(okoume plywood)
.8mm
5⁄32" 3-ply (4mm)
1.0 mm
3⁄16" 3-ply (5mm)
1.2 mm
1⁄4" 3-ply (6mm)
1.5 mm
1⁄4" 3-ply (6mm)
While aircraft birch plywood is expensive, you can
make a lot of models from one standard 4'  4'
(1200mm  1200mm) sheet. Certainly the models are
much cheaper than making full-size mistakes that are
costly not only in materials, but also in time. Scaling
between these two materials has been quite accurate.
Several other factors must also be scaled properly,
however, such as the manufactured keel and the sheer
clamps. Remember that errors made in the models are
projected to full scale by a factor of twelve, so every-
thing you can do to maintain accuracy when building
the models is essential.
Build the model as you would a full-size boat. First
prepare two identical panels. Temporarily fasten them
together and make and cut the keel, bow, and sheer
lines to the dimensions established in your drawings.
True these up and make a master template, a third 
panel identical to the first two. This will serve as a
record of the panels in this model and can be used as a
pattern against which to make small changes in future
models. Make a master template for every model so
that you can clearly see the changes each new panel
dimension brings.
The first step in assembling the panels is to install sheer
clamps. These will, by necessity, be larger than scale. A
1" (25.4mm) square sheer clamp reduces to 1⁄12" (2.1mm)
square, which is too flimsy to adequately represent the
real sheer clamp, so in this case we would increase the
model sheer clamp to 3⁄16" (4.7mm) square. Apply epoxy
to the sheer clamps and hold them in place with spring
clamps or clothespins until the epoxy cures.
Bevel the exterior radius of the plywood, as you would
on a full-size hull if you were using nylon webbing.
Join the two panels along the keel line and at the bow
with duct tape or masking tape. Be careful to line the
edges up perfectly. Surmarks help guarantee alignment
fore and aft.
The next stage of the design is to decide how far apart
and at what points to spread the panels to achieve the
hull shape that you desire. If you have drawn a rough
body plan view of the shape that you hope to get out of
the compounded plywood, you can use this as a begin-
ning point by simply measuring from the body plan the
angles of the hull panels as they emerge from the keel
line on both sides.
The panels join at specific keel angles. Divide the hull
into four equal parts by drawing lines through it at the
hull midpoint, a point between the bow and the
midpoint, and a point between the midpoint and the
stern. These three lines become measuring points for
determining the keel angle. If the hull has a transom,
310
Hull Construction Methods

--- PAGE 325 ---
include it as another measuring point. The size of the
keel angle at the various lines will almost always fall
within fairly narrow ranges. At the forward section line,
it’s usually between 80° and 90° while the mid and aft
section line angles are usually between 120° and 170°.
Occasionally, if the transom is very round and flat, the
stern line angle may be fuller than 140° with the
transom itself as much as 180° on some designs. Larger
keel angles will provide more displacement and less
wetted surface and are therefore desirable.
You are, however, limited by how much the plywood
can be compounded and by the amount of longitudinal
rocker that is cut into the two plywood panels.
Theoretically, if there were no rocker cut into the panels
at all, you could join two panels at close to 180°
included angle and then fold them up into a perfect half
circle. As soon as the keel line of the panels is no longer
straight and the panels have curved rocker cut into
them, the 180° included angle is no longer possible.
The angle is reduced accordingly in direct ratio to the
amount of increase in rocker profile that you use in the
plywood panel. Thus, a trade-off relationship exists
when developing compound curvature between these
two opposing demands on the plywood skin.
With the model, you can go for broke and try for the
largest amount of keel angle that you think you can get
away with. If the stress is so much on the plywood
panels that they break in the folding-up process, you
can try less angle with the next model until you achieve
a successful result. While this trial-and-error method
may appear crude, we know of no more scientific
method to use. No doubt it is only a matter of time
until someone computerizes the compoundability of
plywood panels with all of the different variations. This
perhaps would reduce compounded plywood boat design
down to a neat, tidy, mathematical program. But at the
moment, experimentation seems the only way to proceed.
Carefully mark the bow line, centerline, and stern line
positions on the model panels, just as they are marked
on the full-sized panels, as measurement points for
keeping track of the included angles that are used. For
each measurement position, cut out a small plywood
template with the exact included angle desired to form
a V-shape into which you can spread apart the panels
with accuracy. Staples or tape can hold the V-shaped
plywood templates in place temporarily until the keel
has cured.
As mentioned earlier, the width of the composite keel is
also a factor in determining hull fullness. By preventing
the plywood from starting its bend close to the keel
line, a larger rigid keel effectively promotes the bend
out further in the hull panel, developing more fullness
(and displacement) in the hull. Thus, the larger keel
also contributes to the compounding of the plywood
structure and must be understood as another warring
faction that competes with the included angle and keel
profile cut when developing compounding in the
plywood panels.
With the small models, making the keel is the most
sensitive and difficult part of producing a model hull
that will scale up properly. To be more accurate, very
carefully scribe two lines on each panel at the 2" and
the 4" (scale inches) levels up from and parallel to the
keel line all along its perimeter. Carefully install the
poured keel, using a syringe to lay in a bead of thick-
ened adhesive (using the 406 Filler) that is made just
thick enough so that it will not run, but not so thick
that it is not easily applied by the syringe. (Load the
syringes with this thickened material by pulling out the
plunger.) Using the scribed lines as a guide for the
manufactured keel width, carefully pour the keel down
the center of the panels, trying to keep the bead as even
and straight as possible. With just the syringe, you can
lay an accurate bead of epoxy in place. If too much
epoxy ends up in one area of the keel or not enough in
another, you can use a small stick to scrape excess
epoxy carefully from one area and deposit it in another
to even up the keel before the epoxy begins to cure.
When performing this operation, it helps if the model is
rigidly supported. You can usually accomplish this with
the V-shaped plywood templates that are needed to
hold the panels at their various angles anyway.
When the epoxy has cured, the keel by itself should be
more than strong enough to support the two panels
properly during the fold-up. There is no need to apply
glass cloth tape along the keel line, as we would do
with the full-size hull.
The degree to which the panels are folded up toward
each other is another factor affecting the amount of
Chapter 25 – Compounded Plywood Construction
311

--- PAGE 326 ---
compounding that is induced into the plywood. 
U-shaped hulls with a lot of fullness down low and
narrow decks will induce more compounding stresses
within the plywood than a narrower hull with a wider
deck. Deck width can be measured as a percentage of
the height of the panel at its maximum point. A typical
deck width-to-hull panel ratio is around 75%. For
instance, if our panel height were 24" (600mm) at its
maximum size, a typical deck width would be approxi-
mately 18" (460mm). Any narrower ratio than this
might exert extra bending and compounding forces
upon the plywood for which you should make some
allowance in the initial design by reducing some of the
other compounding factors.
The degree to which the plywood panels will be folded
toward each other (or deck width) also affects the
rocker profile. Narrow decks produce less rocker and
wider decks promote more rocker. It is easy to witness
this phenomenon by making several deck jigs for your
model at varying widths and measuring the amount of
rocker that is produced at the different widths. The
compounded plywood concept of construction
demands overall fair curves for all segments, including
the deck profile. The profile of the deck should have
gracefully flowing lines and not have any unusual
fullness in the bow or straight lines that might
contribute to distortions in the panels as they are being
compounded. (See Figure 25-32.)
Make the deck jig for the model by carving one half of
the deck line profile out of thin plywood—1⁄8" (3mm)
thickness works well—and then make a duplicate for
the other side. Join these two pieces of plywood with
cross-braces at the bow and the transom and a third
brace in the middle to complete the deck jig. Make sure
that the plywood is thick enough and big enough so
that no distortion of the deck jig will take place with
only one brace in the middle. Then fold up the
plywood model and insert it into the deck jig. The
cross-braces at the bow and the transom, together with
the one in the middle, act as guides to hold the deck jig
at the general sheer line position on top of the folded-
up model. It is usually easy to fold up the model by
hand and insert it into the deck jig, but occasionally
another person is needed to help with this operation.
So that you can remove the deck jig and more closely
evaluate the hull, complete the model by bonding on a
precut deck to hold the hull in permanent position. For
the deck, use the same thin birch plywood that is used
to fold up the hull. Cut out two deck panel pieces, one
forward and one aft, that will fit between the three
braces on the deck jig. Even though you can’t cover all
of the hull with the deck sections because some of the
deck jig braces are in the way, this partial deck will give
enough support to the sheers so that there should be
no distortion once the deck jig is removed. Attach the
deck by bonding it in place with thickened adhesive
and holding it down with light weights until the
adhesive cures. To keep the adhesive from bonding the
deck to the deck jig and/or the deck jig to the hull, coat
the deck jig carefully beforehand with a mold release
(paraffin works well).
With the deck jig removed and the deck plywood
faired smooth with the sheer, you will have a model
hull that you can now study closely. Establishing water-
lines on the model hull is necessary so that
displacement values can be calculated. Choose the
desired waterline position at both the bow and transom
areas and set the model upside down on a flat plane.
Prop the model up on blocks so that the marked fore
and aft waterline positions are the same distance from
the flat plane surface. Use a block and a pencil to draw
a continuous waterline around the hull using the flat
312
Hull Construction Methods
Figure 25-32  Considerations for deck plans on folded hulls.
Flat areas can distort or
“oil can” during fold-up
Too much fullness in deck line can
cause distortion in fold-up

--- PAGE 327 ---
plane as a guide. Make sure that the model is also
parallel in the athwartship direction during marking.
(See Figure 25-33.)
With waterlines permanently inscribed on the model,
you will now be able to take off measurements from the
hull so that you can determine the center of buoyancy
and the total displacement available at given waterline
heights. You will also be able to figure your prismatic
coefficient together with wetted surface area. For
detailed instructions on how to figure all of these
factors, consult Chapter 23 of Skene’s Elements of Yacht
Design.
With this first model, you will undoubtedly find some
parts of the hull shape that are not entirely to your
liking. The object then is to determine what changes
you can make in the next model to persuade it to look
more like the hull you envision. Remember, you might
have to compromise because what you would like to
get in a hull shape may be an impossibility with this
method of construction.
If you decide to make a second model, you can
measure the effect of the changes made in the second
model against the first. From this data, you can assess a
cause and effect relationship of any change. The more
models you build with changes, the better your under-
standing of the compounded plywood process will be.
We would advise anyone designing a hull for this
process to spend at least a couple of days developing a
number of models just to gain experience in the
compounded plywood building method.
Going from the Model to Full Size
When you have developed a model hull that you are
happy with, expand all the measurements of the model
up to full size. The most important set of measurements
will come from the master template, that is, the exact
duplicate of the hull panels used in the successful
model. Position the master template on 1⁄4" square graph
paper with the anticipated waterlines as parallel as
possible to the horizontal lines of the paper. Draw the
perimeter of the template on the graph paper using fine
lead with a sharp point for the best accuracy. Draw a
longitudinal line through the approximate horizontal
cente