
--- PAGE 1 ---
GLIDER
MAINTENANCE 
MANUAL
R. C STAFFORD-ALLEN

--- PAGE 2 ---
GLIDER
MAINTENANCE 
MANUAL
A Manual approved by the British 
Gliding Association Technical Committee
by
RAY C STAFFORD-ALIEN
Manager and Ground Engineer of the 
London Gliding Club
Published by
BRITISH GLIDING ASSOCIATION
Londonderry House 
19 Park Lane, London, W.1

--- PAGE 3 ---
THE AUTHOR AT WORK
photo by T. Marshall

--- PAGE 4 ---
INTRODUCTION
THE aim of this manual is not to instruct the Approved 
Inspector how to repair gliders. He already knows this, 
otherwise he would not have obtained Approval. It is 
written for the purpose of helping private owners, and 
people operating Gliding Clubs in out of the way places, 
to keep their machines in a good state of airworthiness. 
It is hoped that it will also be found useful by the man who 
is hoping to get B.G.A. Approval for his work.
I am indebted to F. G. Irving and P. A. Slann who drew 
all the technical illustrations, and to C. O. Vernon for the 
preparation of the Chapter on the B.G.A. Airworthiness 
Scheme.
R. C. STAFFORD-ALLEN.

--- PAGE 5 ---
CONTENTS
page 
INTRODUCTION by R. C. Stafford-Alien 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
iii
FOREWORD by P. A. Wills 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
v
1. MAINTENANCE 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
1
2. REPAIRS. 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
6
3. TIMBER AND PLY REPAIRS, GLUES 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
8
4. METAL REPAIRS 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
13
5. CONTROL SYSTEM AND CABLES, ETC. 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
15
6. FABRIC AND DOPE 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
18
7. TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION AND INSPECTION FOR DAMAGE 
. . 
. . 
. . 
21
8. THE C. OF A. OVERHAUL AND WEIGHING OF GLIDERS 
. . 
. . 
. . 
24
Appendices
I. 
B.G.A. FORMS 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
27
H. 
A LIST OF USEFUL ADDRESSES 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
37
B.G.A. AIRWORTHINESS FEES 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
46
INDEX 
. . 
.. 
. . 
.. 
. . 
. . 
.. 
. . 
.. 
39
The B.G.A. Airworthiness Scheme bv C. O. Vernon 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
42
iv

--- PAGE 6 ---
FOREWORD
ONE of the major attractions of gliding is that in most 
countries we are allowed pretty well to look after ourselves, 
with only the minimum of official control.
But this freedom brings with it responsibility. If we are 
allowed to maintain, repair, and even build our own 
aircraft, we must take care that we can do these things well; 
not only our own lives but those of others depend on it.
A difficulty facing us is this: that with the increasing 
technical complexity of powered craft, and the diminishing 
use in their construction of wood and plywood, which are 
our main materials, the number of professionals who can 
train us in the knowledge and techniques which we need 
is rapidly dwindling.
Thus it has become more and more important that we 
should get at least the minimum of information compiled 
in book form; and since such a book must be meticulously 
accurate its compilation is a laborious business.
But I now take it as axiomatic that, for any task however 
arduous or complicated, the gliding movement will some- 
where produce exactly the right man. It has done it again. 
Ray Stafford-Alien's book will for years to come give the 
basic information eagerly required by owners and 
operators of gliders from Perranporth to Portmoak, from 
Wolloomoloo to Medicine Hat. It will save money, time, 
temper and judging by one or two things I have some- 
times seen going on in the wilder places of the world, even 
lives. Thank you, Ray.
P. A. WILLS,
Chairman, 
1.2.59. 
British Gliding Association.

--- PAGE 7 ---
SLiNCSBV 
SAILPLANES LTD.
KIRBYMOORSIDE 
: YORKSHIRE '. ENGLAND' 
SKYLARK3B.
PERFORMANCE 
RELIABILITY
BROCHURE
'. 
PP.EPBCT : 
S6P&ERGH '. 
SK.VLARK 1 
: BAGUE
REPAIR AND SPARE PARTS SERVICE
We hold extensive stocks of spares and modification kits for all our 
types of aircraft. Aircraft spruce, plywood, glue, paints, fabric, 
dopes, control cables, metal fittings, in fact everything for 
replacement or repairs to your aircraft. Advisory Service avail- 
able for guidance on repairs, maintenance and modifications.
Tel. No.: KIRBYMOORSIDE 312 and 313
Grams: SAILPLANES

--- PAGE 8 ---
1. MAINTENANCE
^yn may define Maintenance as work 
carried out on a glider to prevent 
deterioration, or to delay its effects, while 
repairs may be defined as operations to 
rectify damage. These two definitions are 
clearly not perfect since they do, in a sense, 
overlap. However, they are good enough 
for our purposes.
Let us deal with Maintenance first. How- 
ever much money we lay out on the pur- 
chase of a brand new "Super-Heaven" sail- 
plane, it will, from the moment we take 
delivery, begin to deteriorate. 
But, by 
taking a little thought, and putting in some 
work on it, we can keep that sailplane in 
virtually brand new condition. 
The first 
thing we must deal with is: 
Lubrication
It is more or less axiomatic that, where 
metal rubs on metal, some lubricant should 
be used to reduce friction and prevent wear. 
In the general structure and control system 
of gliders, the moving parts are all slow- 
moving, and for this purpose the best 
lubricant is a good quality grease. 
Un- 
fortunately most manufacturers are rather 
stingy in the matter of fitting grease nipples, 
which enable grease to be pumped in with a 
grease gun. Unless this can be done, it is 
extremely difficult to get the grease into a 
bearing, and no amount of grease slapped 
on the outside of a bearing does any good 
at all. Probably the best method may be 
said to be: "take it apart, grease it, and put 
it together again."
There is a good deal to be said for the use 
of heavy oil, about SAE 140, for control 
systems, particularly for control surface 
hinges. Where the latter are of the usual 
pin-and-split pin type, the only satisfactory 
way to get grease into them is by taking 
them apart. Slapping grease on the outside 
only seems to result in a frightful-looking 
sort of toffee-apple of dust, sand and mud 
forming around the hinge. To strip every 
hinge is a long job. Now, heavy oil does 
creep into the bearing surfaces, and it does 
not take long to go round a glider and put a 
drop on each hinge.
The points which do require regular 
attention are as follows: 
1. The release hooks.
2. All control surface hinges.
3. All pulley bearings (bearings only 
please).
4. Stick 
bearings and torque tube 
bearings.
5. All control lever bearings and the pins 
which connect the levers to the rods or 
cables.
6. Landing wheels unless of the sealed 
ball-bearing type.
You cannot do any harm by over- 
lubricating provided (and this is important) 
the oil or grease goes where it is meant to go. 
You can do a good deal of harm by allowing 
oil or grease to get into places where it 
should not be. Therefore take great care 
that no lubricants get into the wrong places. 
These are as follows: 
1. On to any timber. If left, the timber 
will soak up the oil and eventually 
become rotten.
2. On to any fabric. 
The same will 
happen.
3. On to any cables. The result of this is 
that the oil, or grease, will collect grit 
and form a grinding compound which 
will wear away the cable where it 
passes over pulleys, or through fair 
leads.
4. On to any rubber. If left, the rubber 
will dissolve into a horrid sticky mess.
If you should accidentally spill a little oil 
in any of these places, wipe it up at once; it 
will save you a lot of work in the end.
Finally, how often should you lubricate 
your glider? This is a difficult question, as 
so much depends on the conditions under 
which the glider operates and is stored. 
You will be fairly safe, however, if you 
make a rule to do it about every 20 hours' 
flying, or once a month at least.
Corrosion
This is the chief enemy of the STEEL in 
your glider. 
There are several ways of 
combating it, but all of them depend on 
covering the metal with a protective skin. 
Some steel parts are cadmium or chromium 
plated, but the most usual method is by the 
use of some sort of paint. The principle to 
follow is this: keep the protective skin 
intact. 
If you see any rust developing, 
remove it carefully with a wire brush or fine 
emery cloth and repaint. If you have to do
 1-

--- PAGE 9 ---
this, please make sure that the corrosion 
has not weakened the fitting appreciably. 
If it has done so, you must replace it with a 
new fitting. There are a few metal parts 
which cannot be painted, such as spar pins, 
etc. 
These must be kept covered with 
grease.
There is one other place where corrosion 
must be guarded against, and that is 
wherever wood and steel touch. Wherever 
there is plate fitted onto a wooden member 
or wherever steel bolts pass through 
timbers, there is a chance of corrosion due 
to the moisture in the timber itself. If you 
have to replace bolts or plates in these 
conditions, make sure that both wood and 
steel have a liberal coating of chromate 
jointing compound before assembly.
Timber and Plywood
Both these will deteriorate if they are 
allowed to become too wet or too dry. The 
timber and ply was in its best condition 
when your machine was built, and your aim 
should be to keep it so. Therefore ensure 
that the protective covering on all the wood- 
work is kept intact and touch up with the 
paint brush whenever necessary. This is 
particularly important if your machine is 
built with casein glue as damp will cause a 
fungus to form and attack the glue.
Fabric
When the fabric was applied to your 
machine it was doped to tighten it, and to 
make it waterproof. The doping scheme 
ought to have included in it at least one 
coat of aluminium dope to make it opaque 
as well, although there are still some 
machines flying with clear-doped fabric. 
The main enemies of fabric are ultra-violet 
light, which rots the fibres, and oil, water 
or acid which will eventually destroy it. 
Therefore, keep these things away from 
fabric as far as you can. If the doping was 
properly done, the fabric should be im- 
pervious to water so the odd shower of rain 
will do no harm. However, if water gets 
inside the wing, it may be able to soak the 
fibres of the fabric, so keep the drainage 
eyelets clear. Ultra-violet light is a thing you 
cannot do much about, except to avoid sun- 
light for unnecessarily long periods; and in 
any case, if the doping is really opaque, the 
ultra violet light will be prevented from 
getting at the fabric. In brief, keep the 
fabric clean, and do not let the sun get at it 
more than necessary.
Instruments
Modern aircraft instruments are ex- 
tremely reliable bits of mechanism, and if 
anything does go wrong with them, it is 
generally much better to send them either 
to the manufacturers, or to a specialist firm 
for overhaul. The difficulty is that even if 
one knows what is wrong with them, they 
must be checked for accuracy after any 
adjustment, and this almost always requires 
a special calibrating gadget of some sort. 
However, to prevent trouble developing, the 
following points should be borne in mind: 
1. Use good quality rubber pipe for the 
connections, and replace it whenever 
there are any signs of perishing.
2. Keep moisture and dust out of 
instruments and their piping.
3. Do not subject instruments to rough 
treatment, shocks, etc., and do not 
blow into Air Speed Indicators or 
Variometers.
Cables
Most gliders use cables in their control 
circuits, and it is most important to keep 
the cable tensions correct. If the tension is 
too slack there is a risk >f turnbuckles 
fouling ribs or bulkheads, while if the cable 
is too tight the fittings may be subjected to 
unnecessarily large loads. The effect of "g" 
on cable loads must not be overlooked. In a 
loop, for example, the elevator cable of most 
gliders is subjected to quite a big increase in 
tension, since it is only supported at two 
points about 15 feet apart. Due to the extra 
"g," it tries to sag, and if the tension was 
tight to start with, the increase of tension 
may be very great.
Cables tend to stretch and shrink as the 
temperature increases or decreases, so they 
may require adjusting fairly frequently. 
While on this point, remember that a sail- 
plane sitting on the ground in a temperature 
of 75°F. or more, on a fine sunny summer's 
day, may well be at 8,000 ft. a short time 
later, where the temperature will probably 
be around freezing point; so do not over- 
tighten the cables in summer.
What is the correct tension for cables? 
This is a very difficult matter to describe in 
print, and is much better learnt by an actual 
demonstration on a glider. However, here 
are two rough guides. On a machine such 
as a Tutor with no mass balance on the 
elevator, the tension in the elevator cable is 
about right if the stick will just fall forward 
due to the weight of the elevators. On a
•2—

--- PAGE 10 ---
machine like the Olympia, the cable is about 
right for tension if you just cannot feel a 
"tight-spot" in the elevator movement. 
This latter case is of course complicated by 
the fact that the elevator is partially mass- 
balanced, so the first method does not work 
properly. Use these tensions as a guide tc 
the setting of aileron cables. Rudder cables 
on most gliders are bungee-tensioned in the 
nose of the machine, and in this case they 
look after themselves as regards tension. 
We are assuming, of course, in all these 
tests, that the control circuit is properly 
lubricated.
Safety and Locking
All parts of a glider must be so fitted and 
locked that there is no risk of anything 
working loose or coming undone. We can 
consider turnbuckles first. One commonly 
used type has a barrel in which there is a 
socket at each end with right and left 
handed threads. Into these sockets screw 
the eyebolts. With this type, all the threads 
of the eyebolts must be inside the barrel if 
the turnbuckle is "in safety" or able to 
develop its full strength. 
If any threads 
show, then the cable must be increased in 
length, by the addition of links, etc., to 
allow full engagement of all the threads. A 
second type of turnbuckle, found on
Locking wire,
Olympias and other gliders, consists of a 
right and left handed screw for the central 
portion, and this fits into two sockets which 
are swaged onto the ends of the cable. In 
this type the central screw is threaded 
almost up to the middle, and there is a 
different method of determining whether 
sufficient threads are engaged with the 
sockets to provide full strength. On each 
socket will be found a small hole, about 
f inch from the mouth of the socket, and 
this is the "safety hole." The socket is "in 
safety" if the screw has been screwed in past 
this hole. This must be verified, either by 
looking into the hole or by feeling with a 
pin or piece of wire. This type of turnbuckle 
also has two brass locknuts which should be 
screwed back against the sockets when the 
adjustment is correct. 
In spite of these 
locknuts, the turnbuckle must be properly 
wire-locked as described below.
All turnbuckles must be locked against 
possible movement. Soft iron locking wire 
is generally used for this, and it can be 
bought, galvanised, very cheaply at any 
ironmongers. 
There are two accepted 
methods of locking turnbuckles. The first, 
shown in Fig. 1 (a), is done by passing a 
length of wire through the hole in the 
middle of the barrel, bending the ends up 
and passing them through the eyebolts or
At least 3 full turns
\
(a)
Safety hole
Locking wire
Cable
At least 3 full turns
(b)
Fig.

--- PAGE 11 ---
fittings. The ends are then wrapped round 
the shanks of the eyebolts (and the wire 
itself) for at least three full turns, but 
preferably more.
The second method, sometimes called the 
"figure-of-eight" lock, is preferable where 
the turnbuckle is in an inaccessible place, 
and the wrapping round of the ends is a 
difficult job. 
In the screw type of turn- 
buckle, each socket will be found to contain 
some more holes. One, near the cable end, 
is a little blind hole and was used by the 
makers to ensure that the cable was fully 
home before it was swaged in. This hole 
does not concern us, but near it is a hole 
right through the socket. This is the locking 
hole. The wire passes through this hole, 
crosses through the hole in the central 
screw, through the locking hole in the other 
socket, and the two ends are twisted together 
with at least 3 full turns (preferably more) to 
form a complete figure-of-eight as shown in 
Fig. 1 (b). This may seem more complicated 
than the first method, but you will find that 
it is not. One can usually fiddle the wire in 
easily enough, but often the wrapping down 
of the ends is very difficult in a confined 
space, using the method of Fig. 1 (a). The 
advantage of the second method is that
WRONG
once the wire is threaded into place, and the 
ends brought together, a pair of pliers can 
be used to twist up. 
Whatever type of 
locking is used, always fold down ends of 
wire so that no fouling can occur.
Bolts are used all over the structure of 
most gliders, and all bolts must be locked 
so that there is no danger of the nut 
accidentally working loose. One simple way 
of locking a bolt is to bash the end over 
until it is riveted over the nut. 
This is an 
admirable method for bolts which, you 
hope, are never going to be undone. The 
snag is that if ever you do have to take the 
bolt out, it, and its nut, must be scrapped 
and a new bolt and nut fitted. The next 
method is by means of a castellated nut and 
split pin fitted through a hole in the bolt. 
This is very satisfactory, but in awkward 
places attempts to get the split pin into 
place can lead to much bad language. There 
are on the market a number of so-called 
locking washers which do the job quite well. 
They have a serious disadvantage, however, 
in that all of them tend to cut the fitting and 
the nut with their locking elements, teeth, 
claws or whatever you like to call them. 
You will do well to avoid them on gliders.
Lastly we come to the Stiff nuts, Nyloc,
CORRECT
Thread
in 
shear
Thread
in 
bearing
Washer
No
-, 
thread 
in shear 
or bearing
Fig. 2
_4

--- PAGE 12 ---
Simmonds nuts or Pinnacle nuts. These are 
self-locking nuts and they really are self- 
locking. They have none of the snags of the 
above methods and should be used when- 
ever possible. One small point: make sure 
that the bolt thread does go right through 
the nut, otherwise the self-locking element 
may not be able to do its job. These nuts 
may be used over and over again, but reject 
any which do not seem to be reasonably 
tight on the thread. As a rough guide, if you 
can screw the nut right on with your fingers 
it should be scrapped. Some manufacturers 
prefer to use slotted nuts and split pins in 
control circuits, etc., where there is a chance 
of the bolt rotating, and you should always 
use the same method as the manufacturer.
One method of locking which is some- 
times seen should not be used on gliders. 
This is the practice of screwing down a 
second nut tight onto the first one. It is an 
unreliable method and usually damages the 
bolt threads.
When replacing bolts with new ones, 
make sure that the new bolt is the correct 
length. Bolts should not be fitted with their
threads in shear or in bearing. 
Fig. 2 
should make this clear.
For this reason a washer should always be 
fitted, and you should check that the 
straight portion of the bolt does actually 
reach right through the fitting but not 
through the washer.
Wing pins should be good fits in their 
holes and should be kept greased. 
The 
usual way of locking these is to fit safety 
pins, though if a machine is only very rarely 
derigged, it is a good plan to use split pins 
and washers. These do not rattle so much, 
and are not so liable to catch on clothing, 
etc. This can be a danger with safety pins in 
exposed places, and it is quite easy to pull 
open a safety pin unnoticed from this cause.
Finally, a few general points. Never use 
a split pin more than once. Always use the 
correct size of split pin or safety pin. Always 
use non-cprrodible split pins. Do replace 
locking wire with new if you have to unlock 
a turnbuckle. Do watch for corrosion, bad 
fabric, slack fittings, hinges, faults in wood- 
work finish, etc., and deal with these 
matters at once.
OTTLEY MOTORS LTD.
Established over 30 years as repairers of all types of mechanical 
devices, including engine overhauling and tuning.
Manufacturers and repairers of all types of motor bodies, chassis, etc.
Finishes on metal and wood of all descriptions including cellulose 
and varnish.
Designers and Manufacturers of the
Ottfur Release Gears. Suitable for
Sailplanes and Aero Tugs.
Manufacturers and repairers of all types of Sailplanes and Gliders. 
Machines collected and delivered.
A.R.B. Approved.
Fully experienced staff for all department!. 
Estimates free.
11 CRESCENT ROAD, WOOD GREEN, 
LONDON, N.22
Telephone: BOWES PARK 4568 
  _

--- PAGE 13 ---
2. REPAIRS. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
J^EPAIRS are usually the result of 
accidental damage to a glider. They 
may be necessary, however, as a result of 
bad maintenance, or plain old age. If you 
carry out the necessary maintenance on 
your glider conscientiously, you should be 
able to eliminate almost entirely repairs due 
to bad maintenance, but it is obvious that 
no part of a glider can be considered to last 
for ever, and will, sooner or later, require 
replacing or repairing.
The first thing to remember about any 
sort of repair is that you must only use 
approved materials in your repair. When 
the machine was designed and built, great 
care was taken to ensure that every part of 
the glider was strong enough for its job. 
Quite as much care was taken to see that no 
part was unnecessarily strong, for in this 
case the glider would be heavier than it need 
be. Now, in calculating the strength of all 
the pieces of the glider, the designer used as 
a basis the known strength of approved 
aircraft timber, spruce, ply, etc. and the 
known strength of various specification 
steels. If you, subsequently, go and replace 
some of these high-quality materials with 
any old bits of wood, or metal, your repair 
may look all right but it will most certainly 
be all wrong.
An Inspector of Aircraft Materials is a 
highly skilled man, who has at his disposal 
a fair amount of testing equipment, and 
nobody suggests that we should all become 
Inspectors and set up our own test labora- 
tories. But you must and this cannot be 
stressed too highly you really must make 
sure that nothing goes into your glider 
which has not been tested and approved. 
The best way of doing this is to buy your 
supplies from reputable firms and to insist 
upon an Approved Certificate or Release 
Note for whatever you buy. All good firms 
issue these Notes as a matter of course and 
usually the material, wood, ply or metal, 
bears a stamp or mark which is quoted on 
the Release Note. 
All repairs must, of 
course, be entered up and signed for in the 
glider's log book, and against the entry for 
the repair you should enter the number and 
date of the Release Note for the materials 
used in the repair. It is, if you like, your 
proof that you did use proper aircraft 
materials for the job. The name "Release
—6-
Note" puzzles some people. It is merely a 
note issued by an Inspector that he has 
examined the material in question, that he 
is satisfied that it is up to standard and that 
it may be "released" from store for use on 
aircraft.
A good repair on any aircraft must 
satisfy four requirements: 
1. It must be at least as strong as the 
original structure.
2. It must be as nearly as possible as 
rigid, or stiff, as the original structure 
but neither more nor less so.
3. It must not be appreciably heavier 
than the original structure.
4. All protective coverings, paint, dope, 
etc., must have been made good.
If, when you have completed a repair, you 
can honestly say that it fulfils all four of 
these requirements, then you have every 
right to call it a good repair.
Let us take these four requirements in 
order.
No. 1, strength, is obviously vital, for on 
it may depend your life. First, there must 
be no doubt as to the material in the repair. 
This is satisfied so long as only Approved 
materials are used. 
Secondly, the repair 
scheme must be worked out and splices, 
etc., made correctly. 
For many jobs, 
standard repair schemes can be employed 
which have been found satisfactory by many 
tests. If no standard repair scheme can be 
used for a particular repair, then one must 
be worked out. This means that you must 
plan what damaged material has got to be 
cut out, how you are going to replace it, 
where the joints are going to be, and 
whether any temporary structure has got to 
be fitted to hold the component secure while 
the repair is made and glue is setting. This 
matter is dealt with more fully in a later 
chapter. If the repair is a replacement of a 
component, then this aspect of the job is 
simple.
Your workmanship must be of aircraft 
standard. Now, this does not imply fan- 
tastic skill. Any normal person can fairly 
quickly acquire sufficient skill with wood- 
working tools, and files, and hacksaws, to 
produce first-class repairs. The operations 
in themselves are relatively simple, but you

--- PAGE 14 ---
must make sure that nothing but first-class 
work goes into your repair. All wood joints, 
splices, etc., must fit. If they do not, then 
they must be chiselled, filed, sandpapered, 
until they really do fit. Unless the repair is a 
relatively small one, in which case you can 
use the damaged parts as patterns, you will 
need to obtain drawings of the damaged 
component, and you must make sure that 
the sizes of timber and thicknesses of ply, 
dimensions of gussets and all other details 
are exactly as called for in the drawing.
One might be forgiven for thinking that, 
if a repair is strong enough, then it is satis- 
factory. Things are not quite as simple as 
this, however, and this is where this business 
of stiffness comes in (our No. 2 Require- 
ment). Take, for example, the spar of a 
cantilever wing. The booms, or flanges, of 
the spar are carefully tapered, being thick 
at the wing root where the big bending loads 
act, and thinning out at the tip where the 
loads are lighter. Built like this, the whole 
spar will bend evenly and smoothly like a 
well-designed bow. Now, suppose we make 
a repair to the spar somewhere near the 
middle of the wing, and, misguidedly, we 
beef it up with lots of timber and make it 
very stiff at this point. The spar will now 
not be able to bend, or flex, at the repair 
point, and in consequence it will throw a 
lot' of extra load onto the sections of spar 
at the ends of our repair. If it fails, it will
not fail at our repair. Oh no! Our repair is 
much too strong, but it will fail at the ends 
of the repair. Do not get the idea that we 
have somehow weakened the spar at these 
points. The spar here is as good as ever. 
What we have done, though, is to put a lot 
of extra load onto these points in the spar  
extra load which they were not designed to 
cope with and which ought to have been 
spread over the repaired portion evenly. 
The net result is that the spar as a whole is 
weaker than it should be.
Requirement No. 3, that the repaired job 
should not be appreciably heavier than the 
original, will, in general, be satisfied if the 
repair satisfies our first two requirements as 
to strength and stiffness. A repair is almost 
bound to involve some extra weight, but 
this should be kept as small as possible. In 
all big repairs, and any repairs which are a 
long way from the centre of gravity of the 
glider, the machine must be re-weighed, and 
its new centre of gravity determined. Any 
alteration in weight or C. of G. position 
will alter the permitted maximum and 
minimum pilot weights.
Requirement No. 4 should be only 
common sense. Apart from appearances, 
it is clearly lunacy to spend time and money 
on a good repair job without making sure 
that, when the job is finished, the elements 
cannot get at your work and destroy it.
Sailplane and Gliding
The sports only magazine 
PUBLISHED EVERY OTHER MONTH
60 pages of illustrations and articles for the gliding enthusiast all over
the world.
17s. Annually (U.S.A. $3.00) or Single Copies 2s. lOd.
from: 
BRITISH GLIDING ASSOCIATION
LONDONDERRY HOUSE, 
19 PARK LANE, LONDON, W.I

--- PAGE 15 ---
3. TIMBER AND PLY REPAIRS, GLUES
ALL the wooden parts of a glider are held 
together by some sort of glue, so we 
might well begin this chapter with a dis- 
sertation on glues and their properties. 
First, let us realise that a properly made 
glued joint is actually stronger than the 
wood that it is holding together. This is true 
of all Approved glues and, of course, you 
must use no other. This means that if you 
make a test joint, and then tear it apart after 
the glue has set, the joint will not break in 
the glue line but will tear away the wood 
fibres from one side of the joint.
Now, to get this strength from a glue 
joint the glue has got to be used properly. 
Glue must always be used in shear, and 
never in tension. Fig. 3 should make this 
clear.
Glue
Glut,
fb).RIGHT
Fig. 3
In Fig. 3(a) the glue line is in tension, i.e. 
is tending to be torn apart, and a joint made 
like this is hopelessly weak. In Fig. 3(b) the 
jointed pieces of wood are not so much 
being torn apart, but more trying to slide 
one over the other. The glue line is in shear 
and its strength is enormous. Also please 
note that in the latter method we can make 
the area of the glue surface as big as we like 
by making the slope shallower and therefore 
longer.
Glue must always get right down at the 
wood, so the joints must really fit properly 
before gluing up. Equally important, the 
wood surfaces must be clean, and this does 
not simply mean scraping off any paint. It 
means that, after sanding the surfaces, you 
must not touch them even with clean hands. 
The perspiration from even clean fingers will 
be left on the joint and the oiliness will 
interfere with the proper penetration of the 
glue. Lastly, the joint must be so held or 
clamped so that no movement is possible 
until the glue has set.
Aircraft glues, in the U.K. at any rate, are 
of two main types: Casein Glues and 
Synthetic Resin Glues.
Casein Glue is a white powder and is 
made from milk by a chemical process. 8
Mixing instructions are always included 
with the powder and should always be 
followed exactly, since the different makes 
of glue have slightly different mixing tech- 
niques. A typical mixing method is: mix 
the powder and cold water to a thick creamy 
consistency, allow to stand for 20 mins. and 
the glue is ready for use. Three hours (or 
sometimes four, depending on the make of 
glue) after mixing, the batch must be thrown 
away and a new batch mixed. Casein glue 
does not simply dry out like a gum, but it 
sets by chemical reaction. It is an excellent 
glue improperly used. It is not "gap filling", 
and in consequence the workmanship and 
cleanliness of surfaces must be of the highest 
order. In use, it is spread evenly over both 
surfaces of the joint, which are then 
clamped together with as much pressure as 
possible, short of damaging the timber 
fibres. 
Setting time varies with different 
makes and the ambient temperature, but is 
of the order of 24 hours.
Casein glue is waterproof, but it has one 
serious disadvantage. If it gets wet, it is 
liable, being an organic substance, to fungus 
attack; and once this starts, the glue joint is 
rapidly destroyed. To guard against this, 
casein glued aircraft are usually sprayed 
internally with a light coat of shellac.
Casein glue is not much used these days, 
but there are quite a number of older gliders 
still flying which are casein-glued through- 
out. In case of repair, it is better to use the 
same type of glue as was used in the original 
structure, so these machines should be 
repaired with casein glue.
The most widely used Synthetic Resin 
Glue, in the U.K. at any rate, is Aerolite. 
This is really a plastic which has been 
arrested in its hardening and so remains 
liquid. 
The hardening process can be 
started by bringing the glue into contact 
with a catalyst or Hardener. 
In conse- 
quence, this is what is called a Double 
Application Glue. 
In use, the glue, a 
whitish treacly liquid known as Aerolite 
300, is spread evenly on one piece of wood, 
and the Hardener, a liquid usually stained 
with a dye to assist identification, is spread 
over the other piece, the surfaces having 
been carefully prepared. When all is ready, 
the two pieces of wood are brought together 
and clamped in position while the hardener- 
treated surface is still damp. This last point

--- PAGE 16 ---
is most important. The clamping pressure 
need not be anything like so great with this 
glue; in fact, the best joint is ensured when 
the pressure is only just sufficient to 
guarantee that the surfaces are in proper 
contact all over the joint. This glue is said 
to be gap-filling, but this must not be made 
an excuse for inferior workmanship.
Setting begins immediately the glue 
touches the hardener, so the two must never 
come into con tact except as above described. 
Setting times vary enormously with tem- 
perature, and, if suitable heat can be 
applied, may be reduced to an hour or so. 
Times also vary depending on which speed 
of hardener is used. This is made in three 
speeds, 
"Rapid" 
(coloured 
amber), 
"Medium" (coloured green), and "Slow" 
(coloured violet). 
The last two will be 
found the most useful for glider repairs, and 
it is a good rule to use the slower hardener 
if you have a choice, since this allows more 
time for tacking or clamping up. 
The 
available times for this are quoted on the 
manufacturer's instructions sheet. 
These 
hardeners can be obtained undyed, or 
colourless, but their use is not recom- 
mended. The purpose of the dye is to prove, 
conclusively, that the hardener has been 
used. The makers of this glue, Messrs. Aero 
Research, Ltd., of Duxford, Cambridge- 
shire, supply, with every batch, full in- 
structions for use, and temperature/setting 
time tables for the various speeds of 
hardeners. When using this glue, some form 
of artificial heating must be used if the 
temperature is below 40°F. This can usually 
be quite easily arranged, a favourite method 
being to fix ordinary electric light bulbs 
with some form of reflector around the 
joint. It is quite surprising what a lot of 
heat can be applied in this way. Hot water 
bottles will also be found useful on 
occasions.
Being a plastic, the glued joint is un- 
affected by moisture, fungus attack, or 
anything else. However, in its liquid form, 
Aerolite 300 does tend to harden very slowly 
and for this reason the store life of the glue 
is three months from date of manufacture. 
After this period the glue must be thrown 
away, or, at any rate, not used for aircraft 
work, though it may be quite good enough 
for trailer repair and 
suchlike. The 
hardeners have an indefinite store life.
The makers also produce the same glue 
in powder form. This is known as Aerolite 
306, and when mixed with water, in the
—9
correct proportions, forms Aerolite 300. 
The advantage of this is that, in powder, the 
glue has a store life of two years, so that 
batches of glue can be mixed up as required. 
This is a very convenient way of using 
Aerolite, but make sure that the mixing is 
done in the correct proportions and that all 
air bubbles are removed from the glue 
before use. This may take one or two days. 
Keep in an airtight jar, or a skin will form 
on the surface. This skin will not re-dissolve 
and must be removed.
Finally, do keep the glue and hardener 
apart at all times. If one drop of hardener 
accidentally spills into the glue pot, that 
glue is infected and must be thrown away.
Aero Research, Ltd., also make another 
glue known as Aerodux. This is not often 
come across, but it is an excellent glue. 
It is a Synthetic Resin, but has one snag 
from our point of view. It is very slow 
setting in fact, its full strength is not 
developed until about seven days after the 
joint is made. This does not matter much 
from the constructional point of view, but it 
is a serious drawback when considering 
repairs. This glue is a red treacly liquid and 
the hardener is a white powder. 
When 
required for use, the correct amount of the 
hardener powder is stirred into the glue. 
The glue is then ready for use and remains 
usable for a few hours depending on the 
temperature. This glue is applied to both 
surfaces to be joined, and the joint is 
clamped up in the usual way. This glue has 
much to recommend it when building a 
large component or repairing a spar, since 
the time element is much less critical. 
Initial setting is fairly quick a matter of a 
few hours, but final hardening to produce 
full strength as stated above is rather a 
lengthy business. This glue is used fairly 
widely in the manufacture of rotor blades 
for 
helicopters, 
and 
other 
high-duty 
applications.
Timber Repairs
It will help you enormously if you can 
obtain a copy of A.P. 2662A entitled 
"Standard Repairs to Airframes". Although 
it bears on its cover the statement "Promul- 
gated for the information of all concerned", 
someone has decreed that this is a "Re- 
stricted" publication and cannot be bought 
by the public. 
It may be difficult for 
ordinary intelligence to see quite how the 
Queen's enemies might benefit by the

--- PAGE 17 ---
possession of this book; but, as we all 
know by now, "the man in Whitehall knows 
best . 
However, the British Gliding 
Association will probably be able to obtain 
a copy for you, provided you can satisfy 
them that you are not a lunatic, or an 
anarchist.
There are, in this book, many worked-out 
schemes for the repair of almost every type 
of damage, and if you follow the scheme 
appropriate to the job you are repairing, 
you can hardly go wrong.
However, if you cannot obtain a copy of 
A.P. 2662A, we had better consider timber 
repairs from first principles. 
Timber is 
joined to timber by glue and nothing else. 
Any odd tacks, or screws, you may find are 
virtually unstressed, and were fitted to 
ensure that the gluing up of the original 
joint was satisfactory. This, of course, does 
not apply where you find a metal component 
screwed to a wooded one, e.g., a skid shoe 
on a main skid. Therefore, when we have to 
make good any damage to a wooden struc- 
ture, we must do it by means of wood and 
glue alone.
Most gliders are built of spruce for the 
main load-carrying members, with birch or 
gaboon plywood for skinning and bracing 
bulkheads, or forming spar webs, etc. Let 
us consider repairs to spruce members first. 
Basically there are two main types of 
glued joint; the lapped joint and the 
scarfed joint. The lapped joint is normally 
only used for trivial repairs or repairs to 
comparatively lightly loaded members.
,Oack
Fig. 4
Fig. 4 shows a patch repair using a lapped 
joint to repair the top boom of a wing rib. 
In this case the patch piece must be of the 
same dimensions as the original boom, the 
ends must be chamfered down to a slope of 
at least 5 to 1 and the parallel portion of the 
patch piece must be at least ten times the 
thickness of the original boom. The patch 
piece is simply glued into position and 
cramped or clipped until the glue has set. 
For this purpose, bulldog clips, or spring- 
type clothes pegs, will be found very useful.
This is a very simple and quick repair but 
its disadvantages are obvious. 
We have 
made the job heavier, and we have increased 
the stiffness of the boom. 
These disad- 
vantages are not very important in a small 
repair of this nature, and the boom is a 
comparatively lightly stressed member, so 
we can call this a satisfactory repair. Note 
that the ends of the patch piece must be 
chamfered to avoid the sudden change of 
stiffness there would otherwise be.
Except on trivial repairs and lightly 
stressed members, this system is not good 
enough, and we must look for a better way.
This better way is the scarfed joint, and is 
illustrated in Fig. 5.
Ftath«r-edge-
-10-
Fig. 5
To make the scarfed joint the two ends of 
the pieces of wood are planed, shaved, and 
filed down until they fit as shown in the 
figure, and then glued. The length of the 
scarf must be at least 12 times the thickness 
of the wood, but should be 15 times if it is 
possible to make it so. Never forget that a 
long splice is much easier to make than a 
short one, and the glued area is corres- 
pondingly greater so that a better joint 
results. A 12 to 1 scarf, or splice is satis- 
factory, but the individual scarfs must fit 
absolutely perfectly. It is a very good rule 
to make all scarfed joints in solid members 
to slope at 15 to 1 for this reason, and only 
use the 12 to 1 slope if it is absolutely im- 
possible to use the full length of 15 to 1.
One further point needs a little considera- 
tion. This is the feather edge, or point of 
each scarfed piece. It is clearly vulnerable 
either during the gluing, or later in service. 
If the member is subjected to any bending 
in the plane of the glue surface, then any 
tendency for the feather edges to lift will 
cause a crack to try to creep in and force the 
scarfed surfaces apart. To prevent this, it is 
a good plan to glue, over the feather edge 
points, a reinforcing strip. 
Now, A.P. 
2662A shows reinforcing strips made from 
spruce. In general on gliders our repairs 
will be made on much thinner sections than 
is usual on Service aircraft, and ply rein- 
forcing strips are quite satisfactory. The 
strip should be at least 6 T long on the

--- PAGE 18 ---
parallel portion (T being the thickness of 
the repaired member) and the ends must be 
chamfered down to a slope of at least 5 to 1 
as shown in Fig. 6.
Ply skin.. No reinforcing strip requd.
5 tol Chamfer
Fig. 6
If one side of the scarf is glued against a 
ply skin, as shown on the upper side of the 
scarf in Fig. 6, then of course no reinforcing 
strip is needed, since the skin performs this 
job. The grain of the strip must run, on the 
outer veneers, parallel to the grain in the 
scarfed member. As regards thickness of 
strip, -jk in. ply will serve for members 
f in. square to about f in. square, and 
proportionately, though above J in. square 
sections it is probably better and easier to 
use spruce reinforcing strips of a thickness 
of i T where T is the thickness of the 
member.
Do not let the fitting of a reinforcing strip 
be an excuse for inferior workmanship. Its 
purpose is solely to prevent the possibility 
of the points of the scarf from working 
open. The strength of the joint must be in 
the scarfed joint itself.
Plywood Repairs
Here again we have two basic types of 
glued joint, the lapped joint and the 
scarfed joint. The lapped joint is mainly 
used in patching minor damage. Patches of 
ply should be of the same thickness and 
grain direction as the original ply and should 
be glued onto the back, or inside, of the 
panel. All edges should be chamfered down 
at a slope of 5 to 1. Patching is useful for 
repairing odd cracks, holes, etc., in lightly 
stressed panels of ply, provided these are 
small and of minor importance. Do not 
use this method for important ply panels 
such as leading-edge ply, etc. For this type 
of repair, as, in fact, for the majority of 
ply repairs, scarf joints must be used.
You know, by now, that you must only 
use Approved plywood, but here is a word 
of warning. 
You will come across two 
different types of plywood in glider con- 
struction. The first, or ordinary plywood, 
consists of three veneers of wood, the outer
two veneers being laid so that the grain 
runs parallel with the length of the sheet, 
while the centre veneer is laid so that its 
grain runs at right angles to the two outer 
veneers i.e., runs across the sheet. This 
is the most common type of plywood. The 
second type, sometimes called Shear Ply, 
Diagonal Ply, or 45° Ply, is a high-duty ply- 
wood used in positions of great stress such 
as spar webs and, sometimes, leading-edge 
ply. In this ply the outer veneers are each 
laid at 45° to the long edge of the sheet. 
This ply has enormous strength in shear, 
and must never be replaced by ordinary ply.
Grain is very important in ply panels, 
and all replacements, insertions and patches 
must be arranged so that the grains run as 
in the original structure.
Making scarfed joints in plywood is 
basically the same procedure as in solid 
timber, with a few exceptions. The length 
of the scarf must be nine times the ply 
thickness no more and no less. If you try 
to make the scarf longer, you will almost 
certainly lose strength through the feather 
edges breaking. A shorter scarf is not up to 
strength. No reinforcing strips are required, 
but, of course, any fabric used as a protective 
covering must be made good. 
The scarf 
must be very accurately made, the surfaces 
must be really flat and must fit perfectly 
before gluing up. This is made easier by the 
laminated form of plywood, since a good 
scarf shows three straight stripes, of equal 
width, where the three veneers have been 
shaved down. Mark off your scarfs with a 
pencil line before you start and shave down 
with a file rather than a plane. The latter is 
rather too greedy and tends to break up the 
feather edge. The new "carrot grater" type 
files with replaceable blades will be found 
very useful for scarfing ply.
All ply scarfs must be backed; i.e., there 
must be a rib or frame behind the scarf, or 
it is impossible to close the scarf for gluing. 
Moreover, the backing must be at least 
three-quarters of the width of the scarf, and, 
if necessary, the rib, or frame, must have a 
strip of timber glued alongside it to make it 
up to this thickness. If there is no rib or 
frame to use, then you must fit a backing 
piece, glued into place. Never try to scarf 
onto thin air, i.e., without backing; it is a 
waste of time.
If you consider that a backing piece is 
materially increasing the stiffness of the 
structure at the repair, it may be advisable 
to remove it again after the repair is finished.
—11-

--- PAGE 19 ---
The usual method of closing up a scarf 
joint in ply is by means of a tacking strip. 
This is a strip of plywood about an 
inch wide which is tacked down over the 
scarf. The operation is made much easier 
if prepared strips, with the tack already 
stuck in them, are made up beforehand. 
When the joints have set, these strips are 
removed and the tacks drawn out again. 
As a general principle, all tacks should be 
removed after a repair. If you find, as you 
may, that on a particular job some tacks 
cannot be removed owing to inaccessibility, 
then these tacks must be of brass. Otherwise 
steel tacks may be used, but these must be
Tacks bent over,
Support 
right up/ 
to edge
Packing 
strip
Tacking strip 
and tacks
n_-
-Frame
This width to be at 
least 3M of scarf length
Fig. 7
removed or corrosion will set in and damage 
the timber. Fig. 7 shows a typical ply scarf 
repair.
There is another type of repair which falls 
rather between the two types described 
above. This is the Flush Insertion type of 
ply repair. It is useful where damage is too 
big for a small patch but not sufficient to 
justify scarfing in a new panel. It is made by 
cutting out the damage to an oval shape or 
rectangle with radiused corners and gluing 
in a "biscuit" of ply inside the panel. Do 
not make the hole circular unless you can 
get at both sides of the panel, otherwise you 
will not be able to get the biscuit through 
the hole. When the biscuit has been glued 
in, a patch can be cut to fit the hole exactly 
and glued into place. All outer edges of the 
biscuit should be chamfered to a 5 to 1 
slope, and all laps should be at least 1 inch. 
Fig. 8 shows a sketch of this type of repair. 
It is not used much on gliders since the 
panels in general are fairly small, and usually 
it is easier to scarf in a new piece onto the 
nearest frames or ribs.
When replacing a damaged panel of ply 
with a new one, if you have to make a scarf
INSERTED PLY PATCH
Biscuit
Ply Panel
Fig. 8
joint at a place where there was originally a 
scarf joint, do not worry about the direction 
of the original scarf. If the new joint is in 
the same direction as the old one, then things 
are easy. Simply shave down to the old 
scarf joint, clean off all old glue until you 
have a good timber surface, and glue in 
your prepared scarfed panel in the ordinary 
way. However, if the old scarf ran in the 
opposite direction, then ignore it. Scarf in 
the new panel as usual. The joint will be 
amply strong. Fig. 9 shows a cross section 
of a new scarf running in the opposite 
direction to an old one.
New Scarf
Line of 
Old Scarf
Fig. 9
This procedure of a new scarf crossing an 
old one should be avoided in solid spruce 
members. 
The question does not really 
arise since normally we can put our splices 
in these members more or less anywhere we 
like, whereas in ply panels we have to make 
them where there is sufficient backing, i.e., 
on frames or ribs.
Whenever gluing ply, it is important that 
the surfaces are properly sanded before 
gluing, since the process of manufacture 
tends to close up the pores. 
12-

--- PAGE 20 ---
4. METAL REPAIRS
'J'HE metal parts of most gliders are, in 
general, much better replaced, if worn or 
damaged, rather than repaired. There are 
a few exceptions to this rule but not many. 
For instance, skid shoes wear out fairly 
rapidly if gliders are operated on hard 
surfaces, and it is quite a simple matter to 
cut off the worn part of a mild steel main 
skid shoe and weld on a new piece of sheet 
steel. Tailskid shoes also can be repaired 
in this way, though in this case a thin plate 
of cast iron welded on to the sole of the 
tailskid shoe, and then quenched to leave it 
glass hard, seems to stand up to hard work 
better than anything. However, apart from 
trivial things like these, no welding must be 
done on any aircraft structure except by an 
A.R.B. approved welder. This is an absolute 
hard-and-fast rule, and you break it literally 
at your peril.
If metal parts of a glider become distorted 
or worn, replace them. The only real excuse 
for repairing or reconditioning them is 
when the parts are difficult to obtain, as may 
be the case when the glider is a "one off" job.
One instance of this is when the wing/ 
fuselage pins become worn. 
The easiest 
method of dealing with this is to replace the 
wing and fuselage fittings and to fit new 
pins. If you cannot get them you must think 
again. You may be able to ream the holes 
oversize and fit oversize pins, but you must 
not do this until you have received the 
manufacturer's approval. The new pins will 
have to be made, not only of Approved 
steel, but of the actual specification called 
for on the drawings. The snag with this 
system is that the components are then 
non-standard, and, while this does not 
matter on a "one off" glider, it's a darned 
nuisance on a popular type of machine, 
since its parts will not fit any other machine 
of the same type and vice versa.
Metal fittings must be inspected frequently 
for any signs of corrosion or damage. It is 
often not realised that even a light scratch 
can be the starting point of a fatigue crack; 
so keep fittings clean and painted, and do 
not scribe things on them. In this connection 
the writer has seen a Sky sailplane whose 
owner, misguidedly, had scored a line across 
the top spar joint fittings to assist him in 
rigging. Why he could not have painted a 
line on these fittings was not explained. The
latter plan would have been quite useful, 
but the scored line across this heavily stress- 
ed fitting is simply asking for fatigue trouble. 
Fatigue in metal is a most deadly thing. 
Fortunately in our gliders we find very little 
High Tensile Steel used. Nearly all fittings, 
bolts, etc., are made of Mild Steel (although 
it is an aircraft specification mild steel), and 
its behaviour under repeated loading, such 
as would produce fatigue failure, is perfectly 
predictable, unlike some light alloys. This 
means that there is no danger whatever 
from fatigue so long as the fittings are in 
good condition. If, however, the fittings are 
allowed to become corroded or scratched, 
there will be concentrations of stress at the 
weakened points, and this will cause cracks 
to grow from them. For the same reason, if 
a fitting is overstrained it must be replaced. 
Release hooks, in this country at any 
rate, are almost all of the Ottfur type. This 
type is a safety hook, in that it will throw 
out the cable ring if the cable pull exceeds 
a certain angle, as will happen if a pilot 
forgets to pull the release at the top of a 
winch launch. It is most strongly recom- 
mended that no other type of quick-release 
hook be used, and also that only approved 
winch rings be used on launching cables. 
The practice of making up rings locally 
from any old mild steel bar is a very 
dangerous one; the rings may distort under 
load, and it is possible for a distorted ring 
to jam in the release. An approved winch 
ring cannot possibly jam, and it is not an 
expensive item. Nose hooks, intended for 
aero-towing, on some gliders, are locked by 
a pin or bolt. This prevents the release hook 
from "back releasing" and is intended to 
safe-guard against an accidental release 
occurring when the tow cable surges and 
develops an undue amount of slack. This 
might be awkward if you were over the 
middle of the Channel at the time! These 
nose hooks must not be used for winch 
or auto-tow launching unless the locking 
pin, or bolt, is first removed.
These Ottfur release hooks are made in 
several forms, differing mainly in the 
position, and direction of pull, of the 
opening lever. Apart from replacing broken 
springs, etc., it is a waste of time and effort 
trying to repair or recondition them. Messrs. 
Ottley Motors Ltd., the manufacturers, run 
13-

--- PAGE 21 ---
a service for rebuilding these hooks, and the 
charge is so small and the service so quick 
that it is far and away the simplest and 
cheapest way of overhauling them. Your 
hook comes back to you as new, repainted 
and proof tested, and with a Release note 
certifying it O.K.
These release hooks work on what is 
known as the "Over Centre Mechanism" or 
"Toggle Joint". 
This is much better 
understood with the aid of a diagram. Fig. 
10 shows the basic works of a release hook. 
The "back-releasing" action is not shown 
since that is obvious immediately on 
examination of an actual hook.
In the figure the release is shown locked 
(upper drawing) and open (below). In the 
upper sketch it will be obvious that no 
pull, however heavy, on the jaw of the hook 
can open it, since the pivots of the links are 
slightly over the straight-line position AB 
(hence the name "Over Centre Mechanism"). 
The links are merely forced against the stop. 
At the same time quite a small force P, 
applied at the opening lever, is enough to 
lift the links off the stop, and once they pass 
the straight-line position the release will fly 
open into the position shown in the lower 
drawing. A little thought will show that 
the position in which the links come to rest 
in the locked position is rather critical. A 
small alteration here has a very large effect 
on the pull necessary to operate the release 
when under load. Wear in the pivots affects 
the locked position and should be guarded 
against by proper cleaning and lubrication 
of the innards of the release. 
A worn 
release usually requires more pull to open 
it under load.
To check a release for wear, put a finger 
on the jaw of the hook and try to waggle it 
to and fro in the opening and closing direc- 
tion. This will give you a good idea of the 
amount of slack in the link pivots. Then 
waggle it from side to side. This shows up
Stop
CABLE
OPEN
Fig. 10
any wear in the hook pivot. If in doubt, 
compare the amount of slack with that in a 
new or reconditioned release. See that the 
mainspring round the hook pivot inside the 
frame, and the back-releasing spring on the 
outside of the frame, are unbroken and have 
not become weakened. The mainsprings 
particularly are liable to weakening after 
long service, or they may break off one 
"leg". This can usually be detected by the 
flappy feel of the mechanism when it is 
operated without a winch cable in the jaw 
of the hook. 
The cure is, of course, to 
replace the mainspring. The other pivots 
and bolts should be examined for wear and 
security, but you are unlikely to run into 
much trouble here if the hook pivot is O.K. 
The hook pivot, and the link pivots, are 
the spots where wear always shows up first.
-14-

--- PAGE 22 ---
5. CONTROL SYSTEM AND CABLES, ETC
'J'HE control systems on nearly all gliders 
use cables. In many cases cables are 
used throughout, while in others we find 
push-pull rods and torque tubes in various 
places in the systems. We may well start 
this chapter, therefore, with a dissertation 
on cables.
The most widely used cable is 10-cwt. 
extra flexible cable. This consists of seven 
strands of nineteen wires in each strand. 
Eye-splices are made where the cable 
attaches to a turnbuckle or a fitting, though 
in some cases, notably Olympias, the turn- 
buckles and fittings are directly swaged into 
the cables. Previously we have discussed 
cable tensions, so we will not go any further 
into that subject, but will confine ourselves 
to the "ills that this steel coil is heir to".
Cables 
have 
three 
main 
enemies: 
corrosion, abrasion and fatigue. A corroded 
cable must be scrapped at once. 
The 
individual wires in the cable are very thin 
and any corrosion seriously weakens them. 
One of the best corrosion preventatives for 
cable is Lanolin Resin Solution D.T.D. 
297B. This is a yellow sticky paint which 
is applied to the cable. It never dries out 
hard, but remains faintly "rubbery". It can 
be removed again when required with a 
petrol-soaked rag. 
A worn or abraded 
cable also must be scrapped if any individual 
wires are broken. The places to look for this 
are fairleads, pulleys, and the openings in 
bulkheads and frames. Abrasion is rather 
more difficult to deal with, since obviously 
the cable must rub against something some- 
where. However, it will help if all rubbing 
places are kept clean and dry. This means 
not too much of the cable preservative at 
these spots and no lubrication whatever. 
Any attempt at lubrication merely results in 
the collection of grit particles, which then 
form a wonderful grinding compound with 
the grease or oil. This cuts the cable to 
pieces in no time. All fairleads and pulleys 
should be of fibre or plastic and no rubbing 
on unprotected wood or metal should be 
allowed.
The fatigue of cable is probably the most 
difficult problem to deal with. When a cable 
fatigues, the wires crack and break. The 
cause is always repeated bending round too 
small a radius, and manufacturers are often 
to blame for using too small a size of pulley
for the cable. Fatigue frays, in consequence, 
usually happen on the section of cable that 
runs over a pulley. If even only one wire has 
broken, the cable must be scrapped. This 
may seem drastic, but, if one wire has 
cracked, the others are all damaged to some 
extent and the cable cannot be trusted. Any 
rubbing place, such as a fairlead, is also a 
breeding ground for fatigue, since often an 
unsupported length of cable will vibrate in 
flight, and the fairlead is the place where 
bending due to the vibration occurs. There 
is no cure for fatigue other than to introduce 
modifications to the design to prevent it. 
All you can do is to inspect the cables 
frequently and, at the first sign of fatigue, 
scrap and replace the cable.
Splicing Cables
Sooner or later you are going to have to 
replace a cable, and this nearly always 
means that you will have to eye-splice the 
ends. Some machines, notably Olympias, 
have swaged ends to all the cables, and in 
this case you must buy a new cable from the 
makers unless you happen to have a 
swaging machine available. These machines 
are expensive gadgets and are unlikely to be 
found in the average gliding club.
Now splicing control cable is an art 
which is much best taught in a workshop 
by practical demonstration. However, for 
those who wish to teach themselves, here is 
how to go about it.
An eye-splice is always made round either 
a thimble or a bobbin. A thimble is a small 
metal lining to the eye, while a bobbin is a 
circular metal bush, usually intended to be 
fixed into the fitting or control horn by a 
clevis pin. 
The technique is exactly the 
same, though you will find that, since the 
bobbin is circular, it is rather more difficult 
to get the splice tight around it. See Figure 11.
Thimble
Bobbin
Fig. 11
Start by binding tightly round the cable a 
length of waxed thread. 
This binding
-15—

--- PAGE 23 ---
should be about J in. to | in. in length, and 
should be put on about 6 in. from the end 
of the cable. Its purpose is to allow the 
cable to be unravelled for 6 inches but no 
further. Now unravel the end of the cable. 
You will find that there are seven strands 
altogether six outer strands somewhat 
wavy, and a middle one which is quite 
straight. This latter strand we call the heart 
strand because it lies in the heart of the 
cable. Unravel down to the binding and 
splay out the six outer strands somewhat, 
leaving the heart strand sticking straight 
out of the middle. Now wrap the cable 
round the thimble so that the splayed ends, 
where they disappear into the binding, lie 
just at the jaw of the thimble. Mark the 
cable at the other jaw and put on a similar 
binding just inside the other jaw. Wrap the 
cable round the thimble again and lash 
round cable and thimble tightly with string 
to keep it in place while the splice is made. 
This lashing will later be removed when the 
splice is finished. The joint now should look 
like Figure 12, with three outer strands 
lying each side of the parent cable and the 
heart strand along the parent cable.
Now the principle of making the splice is 
to weave the six outer strands back into the
Heart
Spike
Fig. 12
parent cable, over and under each strand 
of it alternately, while the heart strand is 
pushed into the core to lie alongside the 
heart strand of the parent cable. Begin by 
pushing the spike into the cable at the point 
indicated and lift up one of the strands of 
the parent cable and push No. 1 strand 
through in the direction the spike went in. 
Remove the spike and pull No. 1 through 
tight. Pick up the next strand of the parent 
cable with the spike (the strand above as 
seen in the Figure) and do the same with 
No. 2 strand. 
Repeat the process with 
No. 3. Now slip the heart strand under 
No. 3 and push it down into the core of the
parent cable. 
Repeat the procedure of 
picking up the next parent cable strand 
and pass No. 4 under it. Do the same for 
No. 5 strand. Now, if we did the same for 
No. 6, it would have to go a long way round 
the parent cable before being spliced in. 
Therefore we adopt a different plan for this 
strand. It goes in the same place as No. 5, 
but passes under two strands of the parent 
cable. Pull all the strands down tight and 
you have done the first half-tuck of the splice.
Now inspect carefully. 
If you have 
worked correctly, there should be one 
strand coming out of each gap in the parent 
cable, and one only. 
Ignore the heart 
strand. Now, starting anywhere you like, 
take one strand, lead it over the next parent 
cable strand and put it under the next by 
using the spike. Follow round, doing the 
same with each strand in turn. When you 
come to the heart strand, simply ignore it. 
You only weave in the six outer strands 
into the parent cable, leaving the heart 
strand to lie inside the core of your splice 
against the heart strand of the parent cable. 
When you have done this over and under 
business with all six strands, you have 
completed one-and-a-half tucks. Pull down 
tight; inspect to see that one strand, and one 
only, emerges from each gap in the parent 
cable. After each tuck, after pulling tight it 
is a good plan to beat the splice gently with 
a mallet, or hide-faced hammer, on a piece 
of wood. This packs the splice down tight. 
Continue as above until you have a 
minimum of four-and-a-half tucks. When 
checking the number of tucks, select any 
strand, and, beginning at its loose end, 
follow it through the splice, counting as 
you go thus: under-over one, under-over 
two, under-over three, under-over four, 
under four-and-a-half. 
Cut off the loose 
ends of the strands, beat down and bind 
the finish of the splice with waxed linen 
thread. This binding should start at about 
the middle of the splice and finish on the 
unspliced parent cable. It must not cover 
more than half the splice, as this must be 
available for inspection. 
Remove the 
temporary lashing round the thimble and 
your splice is finished.
Now for some tips. A good splice is close, 
and tight, and it should be impossible to see 
daylight through it anywhere. To achieve 
this it helps if, each time a strand is threaded 
through, you take a little of the twist out of 
it. Also try to ensure that the spliced-in 
strands run round the parent cable with 
16 

--- PAGE 24 ---
approximately the same helix angle as the 
parent cable strands, but of course in the 
opposite direction. 
This means that the 
criss-cross effect is equi-angular, and the 
splice packs down tight properly. To stop 
the ends of the strands from unravelling 
when you are splicing, it is a good plan to 
twist the ends up with pliers. 
An even 
better scheme, if you have any acetylene 
welding gear handy, is to fuse the ends 
together by flashing them for a second in the 
blowpipe flame.
Splicing sounds quite easy. It is, when 
you know how. You will probably make 
several horrible wire birds'-nests in your 
first attempts, but don't be discouraged. It 
really is quite easy!
Hand splicing is rapidly being replaced by 
the system of swaged collars. These need a 
special machine to do the swaging, and the 
machine is expensive. However, the swaged 
splice is so neat, and can be done so quickly, 
that it has everything to recommend it.
Bearings and Hinges
Pulley bearings, stick, and torque tube 
bearings, may seem very simple things. 
Sometimes they are fitted with ball bearings, 
but more often they are plain bearings. 
Now, there is more than meets the eye in 
these bearings. 
They must be properly 
lubricated of course, but they must also be 
properly fitted and adjusted. In almost all 
of these bearings there is a replaceable 
element, whether it is a plain bush or a ball 
race. Figure 13 shows a cross section of a 
plain bearing in a pulley.
Bolt
Bush
Pulley H^^i \PulIey 
Fig. 13 
Bracket
The first thing to realise is that the pulley 
is meant to rotate on the bush. This means 
that the bush must be quite a free fit in the 
pulley and also it must be long enough to 
project slightly each side of the pulley, 
Then we can bolt up tightly to ensure that 
the bush is nipped between the sides of the
pulley bracket and can not rotate. If wear 
occurs, we can easily replace the bush or the 
pulley or both. There is, however, plenty of 
bearing area between the bush and pulley, 
and so wear will be slow.
Now consider what happens if lubrication 
is neglected and the bolt is not properly 
tightened. The pulley may seize up on the 
bush. The bush will then probably rotate on 
the bolt, provided that the nip is insufficient 
to hold the bush fixed. The bearing area 
between the bush and bolt is much smaller 
and wear will be rapid. Worse still, the 
pulley, bush and bolt may seize solid and 
the whole issue rotate in the bracket. In 
these circumstances the bearing area is 
almost nil, being merely the thickness of 
plates of the pulley brackets multiplied by 
the diameter of the bolt. 
Wear will be 
extremely rapid and the holes in the 
brackets will wear elongated and the 
bracket and bolt will have to be scrapped.
The above applies equally to stick 
bearings. Where ball races are fitted, the 
same basic rules apply. The inner element 
must be firmly fixed in the bracket and the 
outer element must be properly attached to 
the rotating member, pulley, stick or what- 
ever it may be. The usual way of doing this 
is to make the outer race a press fit in the 
rotating member, and to hold the inner 
race by gripping it endwise exactly like the 
plain bush in the above example.
Control surface hinges should be care- 
fully watched for wear. 
Cleanliness and 
proper lubrication will delay wear in these 
parts, but when they do become worn they 
are very simple and cheap to replace with 
new items. It is usually a waste of time to 
ream and fit over-size pins. One point is 
very important. This is that at least one 
side of the hinge must be positively pre- 
vented from twisting round on its bolt in 
the spar. If this were to happen, so that an 
elevator hinge, for example, were to twist so 
that the axis of the hinge pin became 
vertical instead of horizontal, the control 
surface would lock solid. This would be 
unfunny in the extreme. The usual way of 
securing the hinge against rotation is to fit 
two small wood-screws through a plate 
which is attached under the head of the 
forked eyebolt. 
These screws are driven 
into the spar, and the hinge cannot then 
turn in the spar without shearing these 
screws. In consequence, these screws are 
very important items and must never be 
omitted.
-17-

--- PAGE 25 ---
6. FABRIC AND DOPE
]y/[osj gliders have much of their wing, 
tail and control surfaces covered with 
fabric. 
The fabric contributes nothing 
to the strength of the structure, but it is very 
important nevertheless, because it main- 
tains the aerodynamic shape of the glider. 
On wings, etc., it transfers the lifting forces 
to the ribs, which in turn transfer them to the 
spars and thus to the fuselage. The strength 
of the fabric is therefore important, since, 
if it should rip or split in the air, it would 
spoil the efficiency of the aerofoil and might 
even lead to loss of control.
Fabric is sometimes used to cover ply- 
wood surfaces. In these cases the fabric is 
purely and simply a protective covering and 
a vehicle, or filler, for the dope or paint.
For wings and other flying surfaces two 
types of fabric are commonly used. The 
first is Madapolam, which is a cotton fabric. 
It is very light, and takes dope very well 
though it is rather liable to rot in bad 
conditions. The second type is a cotton 
fabric such as D.T.D. 275. This is some- 
what heavier than Madapolam, but seems 
to resist rot considerably better. It usually 
outlasts Madapolam by a very big margin, 
provided that it is properly doped. It is 
also stronger. 
For covering plywood 
surfaces Madapolam is used, since strength 
does not matter, and the fabric is lighter.
Before we discuss repairs and re-covering 
of components, we must first clear up a few 
points about dopes.
Dopes are not paints, though some 
cellulose paints look and smell very like 
dopes. The purpose of doping fabric is to 
tighten it, make it water and air proof, thus 
preventing rot, make it opaque to prevent 
deterioration from ultra-violet light, and to 
give it a good smooth aerodynamic finish. 
We are not concerned here with the 
chemical composition of dopes, but it may 
be as well to note that different makes of 
dope do differ in composition and fre- 
quently will not agree. If you redope a piece 
of fabric with a dope different from the 
original, you may find that "pickling" or 
blistering occurs. For this reason, keep to 
one make of dope throughout for each job.
All dope manufacturers publish Doping 
Schemes, and fabric should always be doped 
in accordance with an approved Doping 
Scheme. A typical scheme for a wing might
be: Two stick-down coats of clear to attach 
the fabric to the timber, 3 or 4 coats of red 
tautening dope to tauten the fabric, build it 
up and fill the "grain" of the fibres: one or 
two coats aluminium dope, tautening or 
non-tautening, to make the surface opaque, 
followed by two coats of finishing colour, 
non-tautening, to produce the final high- 
gloss polished surface. The doping scheme 
used should always be quoted in the log 
book. This enables repairs to be made with 
the same scheme and thus eliminate the 
danger of using the wrong dopes with all the 
infuriating results, pickling etc.
Doping should be done in a warm, dry 
place, well ventilated. The first coat must 
be brushed on to get proper penetration of 
the fabric. 
Subsequent coats may be 
sprayed. Be careful not to inhale too much 
of the vapour. A mask is useful here and 
should be used when spraying. Drink some 
milk, the more the better, after doping, as 
this will neutralise any of the effects of the 
vapour. If you don't, you may find yourself 
with a lovely headache.
If the doping room is cold and damp, you 
may find a "bloom" forming on the doped 
fabric. This is a maddening trouble, and, 
while you can mitigate it somewhat by 
using Anti-Chill Thinners for the dope, 
there is no cure. You must stop and wait for 
warmer conditions, or stoke up the stove.
Lastly, do remember that dope is terribly 
inflammable. Carelessness in smoking, etc. 
can result in a beautiful bang, followed by a 
glorious bonfire! The doping of gliders and 
aeroplanes is virtually the same thing. The 
only real difference is that the degree of 
tautness aimed at in glider work is some- 
what less, otherwise there is a danger of 
distorting trailing edges, etc. When it comes 
to fabric work, however, there are quite a 
few differences. On gliders no sewing of 
fabric, patches, tears, etc. is necessary. The 
low wing loading permits us to stick the 
fabric down onto the structure with dope 
alone. 
Similarly, no stringing of ribs is 
needed, unless the underside of the wing is 
very deeply cambered, when the fabric is 
sometimes stitched to the bottom booms of 
the ribs. Even this can often be avoided by 
loading the fabric down onto the ribs with 
books, magazines, etc., and carefully doping 
it onto the ribs. This dope is allowed to dry 
18 

--- PAGE 26 ---
before unloading the fabric. All these points 
make fabric work on gliders far easier 
than on powered aircraft.
The most usual job in fabric work is to 
repair a hole, or tear, in a wing. When you 
are satisfied that there is no damage to the 
internal structure, or that any repairs to it 
have been satisfactorily completed, proceed 
as follows: remove all spanners, screw- 
drivers, bolts and nuts, etc. that have been 
left inside the wing, tear away the damaged 
fabric to a rectangular hole, and prepare a 
piece of fabric which will cover this hole 
with about an inch overlap for holes up to 
4in. x 4in. or two-inch overlap for longer 
patches. This patch must be of the same 
material as the wing fabric. With tautening 
dope, clear, and a brush, apply a coat of 
dope to one edge of the hole and dope down 
one edge of the patch, taking care that the 
overlap is correct. Allow this dope to dry, 
and then repeat the procedure along an 
adjacent edge. The other two edges can 
then be similarly treated and allowed to dry. 
The patch should then be redoped around 
the edges and allowed to dry again. The 
idea is to get all edges firmly doped down 
and stuck before doping the middle of the 
patch. The undoped middle portion should 
now look nicely taut and smooth, and you 
can stroke in the first coat of dope with the 
brush evenly all over it. This will nearly 
break your heart because the patch will now 
look a horrid, saggy mess. Fear not: press 
on with the doping scheme, allowing each 
coat to dry before the next is applied. You 
may have to apply a coat or two more, or 
less, than called for in the doping scheme. 
The aim is to get the patch to the same 
tension as the main fabric, and "built up" 
or "filled in" until it has the same texture. 
Use tautening, or non-tautening, dope, 
depending on whether tautness, or filling in, 
is required. Finish with the colour scheme. 
A high gloss can be obtained by rubbing 
over the patch with a rag moistened with 
dope thinners. 
Remember that doped 
fabric will go on tautening very slowly for a 
day or so after doping. Properly applied, a 
patch can be made almost invisible. It will 
help to this end if the patch can be cut v/ith 
pinking shears, or if these are not available, 
the patch should have its edges frayed for 
about |in. all round.
Covering a main component, such as a 
wing, is basically the same process. The 
structure should first have two good coats of 
clear tautening dope applied all over where
the fabric is to stick. Dope down the fabric 
on a long edge first and allow to dry. Now 
stretch the fabric over the whole surface and 
fix it in place. Drawing pins are very useful 
here. When you have it tight and smooth 
all over, dope all round the edges and along 
each rib to stick the fabric into place. Trim 
edges, redope all round again and over ribs, 
etc. and allow to dry. The edge should be 
lapped round the trailing edge and similar 
places. Now turn the wing over and repeat 
the procedure on the other side. You can 
then go ahead according to your approved 
doping scheme. 
All laps round trailing 
edges, etc. should be covered with a 2 in. 
strip of fabric with frayed or pinked edges. 
Tips to bear in mind: do make sure that all 
traces of old fabric are removed. If the old 
fabric was very rotten, this can be quite a 
long job, as it tends to stick to ribs, etc. and 
may have to be sanded off. If the old fabric 
was not too bad, it may tear off the ribs 
and trailing edges, etc. in strips, so don't let 
the fabric get too bad before you decide to 
re-cover. Do ensure your new fabric is really 
dry before you start. It is a good plan to 
put it out in the sun (if any) for an hour, 
while you are getting things ready, to allow 
it to air thoroughly. When brushing in the 
first coats of dope, don't press heavily but 
stroke the dope in with gentle, even strokes. 
Heavy pressure tends to stretch the fabric 
and makes the tautening process rather 
uneven. Each subsequent coat of dope will 
appear to relax the tension when applied, 
but don't worry about this as the tension 
will reappear again, tighter than before, as 
the coat dries off.
Applying fabric to ply-covered surfaces is 
a little different. Dope all over the ply first 
and allow to dry. Now stretch the fabric as 
tightly as possible over the fuselage, or 
whatever it is that you are covering and 
brush in the dope, following up with a 
rubbing pad of fabric to rub the dope 
through the fabric on to the ply. 
Use 
drawing pins if necessary and do the above 
jobs with clear tautening dope. 
Most 
manufacturers 
have 
approved 
doping 
schemes for ply-covered surfaces and one of 
these should be followed. All joins in the 
fabric should be trimmed to edge-to-edge 
butt joints and then covered with 2-in. 
frayed edge, or pinked strip. 
Once the 
fabric has been properly "filled in", the 
surface can be worked up to a really high- 
gloss finish. You can get liquid filler dopes 
which make the filling-in process much 
19—

--- PAGE 27 ---
quicker. 
This process does give a mag- 
nificent protective covering to the plywood 
of a fuselage and it must also add a little to 
the strength. It is true that it is a little 
heavier than ordinary paint, but the lovely 
finish is a joy to behold.
Tips to remember when doping: 
Make sure that the initial "stick down" 
coats of clear dope really do stick. This is 
greatly helped if you rub the dope in with a 
small pad of fabric over all ribs, ply 
surfaces, etc. so that it is properly squeezed 
through the fabric onto the wood below. 
This also eliminates air bubbles under the 
fabric.
The first coats on a patch or a newly 
covered component may feel a little rough 
to the touch. If so, touch them down with 
a fine abrasive paper. This will make a vast 
difference to the final finish.
Brushes get into a horrid state if they are 
not properly cleaned in thinners. A very
f
ood plan is to keep brushes in one of those 
ig sweet jars that confectioners use. Put a 
few inches of thinners in the bottom and 
drop the brushes in. They will stay soft and
in good condition, and the thinners will not 
evaporate provided you keep the lid 
screwed down tight. As these jars are of 
glass, you can see at a glance where the 
particular brush you want is hiding.
Perspex canopies sometimes develop 
cracks through mishandling or damage. To 
stop cracks from spreading, drill a small 
hole, about  & in. or so, at the extreme end 
of the crack. A patch should then be made 
and stuck over the crack, using one of the 
many proprietary brands of perspex cement. 
While on this subject, it might be as well to 
point out that you may come across 
canopies which are not made of perspex at 
all. There are now a variety of transparent 
plastics, and if in doubt, it is always worth 
while to refer to the manufacturers for 
advice. Any patches should of course have 
their edges chamfered down, and it is neater 
to fit them inside the canopy if this is 
possible.
A good perspex cement can be made up 
by dissolving some perspex chips in chloro- 
form, or glacial acetic acid.
Yorkshire
Gliding Club
SUTTON BANK • THIRSK
Full facilities for the repairs 
and maintenance of Club 
and Private owner Sail­ 
planes.
Write to the 
Secretary for quotations
JOHN HULME
MOTOR BODY BUILDER 
RATHMORE ROAD, CAMBRIDGE 
B.G.A. APPROVED INSPECTOR
Phone: CAMBRIDGE 87862
For all repairs, overalls, 
C of A's and materials. 
Trailers built to order. 
A'C Bought and Sold.
—3D-

--- PAGE 28 ---
7. TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION AND 
INSPECTION FOR DAMAGE
BELOW we can deal with the matter of 
inspecting a glider for damage we must 
first have some idea of how the machines are 
built and what each part of the structure is 
meant to do. Gliders can be roughly sub- 
divided into three main types: two-spar, 
strutted single-spar and cantilever. 
Tnis 
classification applies to the wings. 
Fuse- 
lages and tail units we will deal with later.
The classic example of two-spar con- 
struction is the Slingsby Tutor. Each wing 
has two spars running spanwise and each 
spar has its own strut. All the lift force is 
taken by these spars in bending and the 
loads are transmitted to the fuselage by 
means of the struts. To brace the wings 
in the fore-and-aft direction (drag bracing) 
there is a system of diagonal members 
inside the wing, connecting the two spars. 
There are also crossed wires bracing the two 
struts. 
Thus braced, the wing clearly 
cannot twist, for if it did it would have to 
move forward or backward, and this it 
cannot do because of the diagonal bracing 
and the strut wires.
The fuselage of this aircraft is a plain box 
of ply with four longerons of spruce and a 
number of frames to stiffen the sides and to 
preserve the correct shape. The top of the 
box is not covered with ply, but has a light 
triangular fairing covered with fabric to 
give the whole a good streamline form. 
This triangular top is only a fairing, but it 
must be realised that all the rest of the 
fuselage, ply sides and bottom and longe- 
rons, frames etc., is the main load-carrying 
structure, and no damage to this can be 
tolerated if the aircraft is to be considered 
dirworhy.
The tailplane is a simple triangle with a 
leading-edge member or spar on each side 
and a main spar running from tip to tip. 
The main spar's chief job is to carry the 
elevator. The tailplane is attached to the 
fuselage by two bolts, one at the joint of the 
leading-edge members, and one at the mid- 
point of the main spar. These bolts are 
anchored to frames in the fuselage. 
The 
main spar is also stabilised sideways by two 
small struts to the fuselage frame.
Struts and wires are expensive in drag. 
To secure greater efficiency the struts must
go, or at least two of them. This br'ngs us 
to the next type of construction.
The single-spar strutted type is typified by 
the T-21, Kites I and II, Gull I, Grunau 
Baby, etc. In this form the wing is built with 
one massive spar which is placed at about a 
third of the chord from the leading edge. 
This is about the average position of the 
Centre of Pressure for most normal con- 
ditions of flight. This great spar takes all the 
lift forces in bending and transfers the load 
to the fuselage through one single strut on 
each side of the aircraft. 
This spar and 
strut, however, have almost no stiffness in 
twist, so something else has got to be added 
to stop the wing from twisting.
Now the stiffest thing, weight for weight, 
in twisting is a tube; so the leading edge of 
the wing is made a wooden tube by forming 
it out of ply glued to the spar. It is a "D"- 
shaped tube, it is true, and not a circular 
shape which we usually assume a tube to 
be; but it is a tube for all that, and it is 
enormously stiff in twisting. To deal with 
the bracing in drag we usually find that at 
the root of each wing there is a big diagonal, 
sometimes called the drag spar, which 
connects up to the fuselage via the rear 
fuselage pin and runs diagonally forward to 
join the main spar a few feet out from the 
root. Usually the triangle formed by the 
root rib, main spar and drag spar is com- 
pletely covered over with ply. Outboard of 
this junction of main spar and drag spar, the 
drag forces are dealt with by the leading- 
edge ply tube. 
This tube is stiffened all 
along its length by many nose ribs which 
also ensure the correct aerofoil shape. It 
will now be obvious that this tube is a vital 
part of the structure, and it is of the first 
importance that there should be no damage 
here. 
Should any damage be found, the 
tube cannot do its job properly and the 
aircraft is not airworthy until the damage 
has been made good.
Fuselages in this type vary a good deal 
irom a wooden girder as in the T-21B, 
through various shapes of ply box fu .elages 
to the round or oval section monocoques. 
These last are pure ply tubes, stiffened 
where necessary by frames, and by longe- 
rons or stringers running lengthwise.
-21-

--- PAGE 29 ---
From here it is a simple step to the third 
type of sailplane construction which is 
The Cantilever Wing
In this type, instead of hinging the wing 
on to the fuselage and then holding it there 
by means of a strut, we simply beef up the 
spar at the root end and connect the spars 
of each wing together rigidly so that the 
main spar can be considered continuous 
from tip to tip. The fittings in the joint of 
the two wings do take enormous bending 
loads, so they have to be very big and 
strong. In consequence, this type of con- 
struction is somewhat heavier than the other 
two types, but this is far outweighed by the 
gain in aerodynamic efficiency which results 
from the deletion of the struts. The leading- 
edge ply tube is there, and it does exactly 
the same job as before, dealing with the 
twist and drag forces. Also we find our old 
friend the drag spar in the root, and the ply 
triangle boxing-in the root, mainspar and 
drag spar. 
Fuselages in these types are 
usually pure monocoques, for reasons of 
aerodynamic efficiency. 
Tailplanes are 
often mounted as cantilevers, though a few 
types still use tailplane struts.
The three-piece wing, which has come 
into favour lately, merits a word. It is a 
cantilever just as before, but it has two 
joints outboard instead of one joint in the 
middle. 
The construction of the wing, 
however, is basically the same: one spar, 
leading-edge ply tube, etc. 
It is a little 
deceptive at first sight, since these sailplanes 
often use a laminar-flow wing section, and 
this necessitates the use of ply covering to 
guarantee the surface finish required. This 
ply masks a lot of the structure which 
would otherwise be fairly easy to detect.
One peculiar type must be mentioned, 
and that is the Slingsby Prefect. This is a 
half-and-half type of construction. There 
are two spars in each wing, but they are so 
strongly braced together by stout diagonal 
members that they can almost be con- 
sidered to be one spar. They are so stiff in 
twist, like this, that only one strut is needed, 
and, although the wing has a leading-edge 
ply box or tube, this does not by any means 
take all the twisting loads.
Having acquired some knowledge of what 
holds the things together, we can now go on 
to discuss the subject of inspection for 
damage.
Now, the usual cause for this inspection
is when the machine has been subjected to 
some unusual strain, such as a heavy 
landing, or when it has been involved in a 
crash. The first thing to do is to find out, 
if you can, just exactly what happened. If 
you can do this, you can then work out what 
parts of the structure have taken the worst 
pasting. For instance, a machine may have 
received a heavy landing by touching 
lightly on the wheel, rising to four or five 
feet and then pitching on to its nose. In this 
case you might well find that the drag 
bracing was damaged and some of the front 
frames in the fuselage crushed. 
On the 
other hand, a heavy landing may well mean 
stalling on to the ground from four feet and 
hitting tail-skid first. In this case you are 
much more likely to find crushed main 
bulkheads in the fuselage, torn-out aileron 
horns, and compression shakes in the top 
longerons. 
In case the expression "com- 
pression shake" is strange to you, it may 
be as well to say now that we shall go into 
this more thoroughly later on. 
The next 
thing to remember is that you must trace 
the path of the impact through the structure 
and follow along each member looking for 
damage. Never forget that, although the 
impact came on one end of a member, you 
may well find the damage at the other end. 
A longeron, for instance, may get a bash at 
the tail end from a tail-first landing, but the 
damage may be right up near the wing 
where you may find a compression shake.
Now, what sort of damage do you look 
for? Well, timber, when it fails in tension 
or in shear, simply breaks or splinters. The 
damage is obvious. However, when it fails 
in compression you may simply find a 
compression shake. 
These compression 
shakes are often very difficult to detect. 
Often the only visible sign is a hair-line 
crack in the paint or varnish, running 
across the grain of the wood. If in doubt, 
you can always find out whether a 
suspicious-looking mark is a compression 
shake or not by a little judicious bending or 
twisting of the member. 
If it is a com- 
pression shake, the crack will open. How 
does a compression shake occur? 
To 
answer this we must first look at the 
structure of timber itself. 
An ordinary 
piece of timber consists of a bundle of 
fibres running lengthwise, bound together 
by resinous substances (Fig. 14a). 
When 
the timber is compressed beyond its elastic 
limit (Fig. 14b), the fibres simply fold over 
for a short length and double back on them- 
22 

--- PAGE 30 ---
selves. Needless to say, the timber is now 
useless and must be replaced.
Other signs of damage you may find are: 
pulled fittings, stretched holes in fittings,
Fig. 14a
and the fittings themselves moved on their 
timbers. This last is usually easy to see, as 
the paint line will show where the fitting 
was before it shifted. If you find a bracing 
wire slack, it is almost a certainty because 
its attachments or the surrounding structure 
have shifted. 
Slack control cables also 
nearly always mean that a fitting some-
where in the circuit has been pulled out of 
shape or wrenched adrift from its mounting. 
Go through the circuit from end to end 
until you find the damage. As a general 
rule, it is much quicker and better to replace 
fittings with new ones rather than to try to 
repair or reclaim damaged ones.
Compression
Shake\:«
Fig. 14b
GLIDING BOOKS AND EQUIPMENT
Gliding Handbook by A. D. PIGGOTT 
25/-
The Soaring Pilot by A. AND L. WELCH 
18/6
World Sailplanes by OSTIV 
17/6
Further Outlook by LUDLAM AND SCORER 
15/-
Playground in the Sky by A. F. GOTCH 
12/6
Cloud Study by R. s. SCORER 
* 
12/6
Come Gliding with Me by A. WELCH 
9/6
Cloud Reading for Pilots by A. WELCH 
7/6
On Being a Bird by PHILIP WILLS 
5/-
Elementary Gliding by P. BLANCHARD 
5/-
F.A.L. Regulations for Records 
2/6
Personal Logbooks 
2/- and 4/-
B.G.A. Operational Regulations 
l/-
Aircraft Logbooks 
7/6
and
Scarves 
23/-
Chokers 
15/-
Gliding Ties 
12/6
(All navy blue with silver stripes and gliders)
Car/bicycle badges 
12/6
Blazer badges 
5/6
from
The British Gliding Association, 19 Park Lane, London, W.I 
Telephone: HYDe Park 3341
____

--- PAGE 31 ---
8. THE C. OF A. OVERHAUL AND 
WEIGHING OF GLIDERS
The Certificate of Airworthiness of a 
glider lasts for twelve months, and may 
be renewed for a similar period on applica- 
tion to the British Gliding Association, 
together with the renewal fee, and a 
certificate, on the proper form, signed by a 
B.G.A. Approved Inspector, that the 
machine is airworthy. This latter involves a 
complete inspection of the machine, and it 
is the purpose of this chapter to give an 
outline of what this involves. Apart from 
the inspection of the machine as it stands, 
there are some items which must be re- 
moved, or stripped, for inspection.
There is some misconception about 
Approved Inspectors in some quarters. The 
Inspector is a man who is qualified to pass, 
or condemn, a part of a glider, or to pass, 
or condemn, any work carried out on it. 
The work itself may be carried out by any- 
body, but it must subsequently be inspected 
and certified as O.K. by an Approved 
Inspector. 
This means that a Private 
Owner is perfectly at liberty to do his own 
C. of A. overhaul on his own glider, 
provided that he gets his work inspected 
and approved by an Approved Inspector. 
Many Private Owners do just this, and the 
usual way of going about it is as follows: 
When the C. of A. is soon to expire, an 
Approved Inspector is contacted and asked 
to do the inspection. 
The machine is 
prepared by removing all inspection panels, 
etc. 
The Inspector makes a thorough 
examination of the whole machine and its 
log book, and writes down all the repairs, 
snags, etc., which he deems necessary. The 
Owner can then carry out the work, and 
when he has finished it he contacts the 
Inspector again. The latter then inspects all 
the work done and satisfies himself that it 
has been properly done. He then ensures 
that the logbook has been correctly made 
up, listing all the repairs carried out. If he 
is quite satisfied he signs the log book 
entries, and recommends the renewal of the 
C. of A.
Let us assume that you have a glider 
whose C. of A. you want to renew. Before 
you do anything else, make sure that the 
log book is up to date, and that all repairs 
have been signed up by an Approved 
Inspector, or you may find that these 
repairs will have to be opened up and the
work re-done. Have the machine ready for 
the Inspector, with all inspection panels off 
and the seats out, and try to arrange lights 
so that the whole machine can be easily 
examined. Assuming that the glider is in 
reasonable condition, the list below is a 
rough outline of the work you can expect to 
have to do: 
Ail fittings will be checked for corrosion, 
and any found must be cleaned off and the 
fittings repainted.
All main pins, hinge pins, control pins, 
etc. will be checked for wear and replaced 
where necessary.
All control cables must be drawn, in- 
spected and re-protected. 
Any damaged 
ones will have to be replaced.
All fittings will be examined for security. 
The whole structure of the machine will be 
examined for soundness, and any suspicious 
joints or bad timber made good.
The fabric covering will be checked for 
condition and will have to be renewed 
where necessary.
All protective coatings w'll have to be 
made good.
The instruments will have to be checked, 
and the A.S.L. calibration verified. 
All 
perished rubber piping will have to be 
replaced.
The release hook will probably have to 
be overhauled.
The wheel, tyre, skids and skid rubbers 
will have to be checked and replacements 
fitted where necessary.
The Inspector may also require the glider 
to be re-weighed.
The weighing of a glider is not a difficult 
matter, provided the equipment is at hand. 
You will need two big spring balances, or 
steelyards, a measuring tape, some rope 
slings, and a good strong overhead beam 
from which to suspend the glider. Before 
we start, however, it might be a good idea to 
get quite clear what we are after, with all 
this weighing racket.
The glider is weighed for two reasons, 
First, we want to find out the empty weight 
of the glider so that we can determine, 
knowing the maximum permitted all-up- 
weight, what payload the glider can carry. 
Second, and this is rather more important, 
we want to find out where the Centre of 
Gravity of the empty glider is. 
This is 
 24 

--- PAGE 32 ---
vitally important because, in the C. of A. 
document, you will find the maximum 
forward and aft positions of the Centre of 
Gravity (C.G. for short) for the loaded 
glider are laid down in the C. of A. docu- 
ment. It is necessary to know the position 
of the Empty C.G. before the position of 
the Loaded C.G. can be worked out for 
various loads. 
You will find that the 
Empty C.G position is stated in the C. of 
A. document, but this will be affected if any 
large repairs have been done, or the machine 
has been refabriced; and in these cases 
the machine must be re-weighed and the 
new Empty Weight and Empty C.G. 
position determined By the way, you must 
not alter the C. of A. document yourself. 
You must supply the B.C.A. with the 
information and they will do the alteration. 
So far, so good. 
Now to the actual 
weighing. 
Hang up your two spring 
balances to the overhead beam, move the 
glider into position under them, and by 
means of the rope slings, hang the glider on 
the balances. Adjust the length of the ropes 
until the glider is in flying attitude. As a 
rough guide to this, get the lower surface of 
the wing as near the horizontal as you can. 
In the C. of A. document you will find the 
C.G. is always referred to as so many 
inches forward or aft of a Datum Point and 
this Datum Point is defined. The most usual 
Datum Point is the leading edge of the wing 
at the root. We will assume that this is the 
Datum Point for the glider we are consider- 
ing. 
Read the weights indicated on the 
spring balances, subtracting, of course, the
weights of the rope slings, etc. Also measure 
the distances of the slings from the Datum 
Point.
Referring to Fig. 15, let A Ibs. be the 
reading of the nose balance and B Ibs. be 
that of the tail balance. Also let a and b 
inches be the distances, respectively, of the 
two slings from the Datum Point.
The Empty weight, W is clearly A + B 
Ibs. Now the position of the Empty C.G. 
is x inches aft of the Datum Point, and x 
is the dimension we want to find. Since the 
glider is in equilibrium, all the clockwise 
and anti-clockwise moments exactly balance. 
It does not matter what point we choose to 
take moments about; the result will be the 
same. 
However, the calculation is easier 
about some points than others. Let us use 
the sling A for a start. Taking clockwise 
moments on the left, and anticlockwise 
moments on the right of the equation, we 
get:  
W(x + a) = B(a + b) 
B(a + b)
Therefore x + a — ———— 
W
This gives us x + a, and, since we know the 
dimension a, we can find x by subtraction. 
This is not quite the whole story, though. 
We know now the maximum load the glider 
may carry. 
It is Ail-Up Weight minus 
Empty Weight. We ought to check the C.G. 
position when a pilot of this weight is in the 
cockpit. 
With most ordinary types of 
glider, increasing the pilot weight moves the 
C.G. forward, because the pilot sits well
W -A+B
Fig. 15
-25-

--- PAGE 33 ---
forward of the empty C.G. If, with the 
maximum pilot weight in the cockpit, the 
C.G. is between the limits, then all is well. 
If it is not within limits, then we must 
determine what pilot weight brings the 
C.G. up to its forward limit. Any pilot 
heavier than this must carry ballast on the 
tail, to keep the C.G. within the limits.
To check C.G. position at Maximum 
Pilot weight we proceed as follows: 
w+p
we do so, we will check the minimum pilot 
weight. This may be an odd thing to do, 
but the reason will become obvious later.
Checking for Minimum Pilot Weight is a 
little different from the last two checks. In 
this case we know all the dimensions and are 
trying to find out a weight. Assume we have 
got a pilot, of unknown weight, in the 
cockpit but that the C.G. position is on the 
aft limit.
Draw a diagram like Figure 16. 
This time take moments about the C.G.: 
W(x — y) = P(y+p) 
W(x — y) 
Therefore P =      -
In this figure:
P = Max. Pilot Weight (AUW W) 
W = Empty Weight of Glider 
x = Empty C.G. Distance from Datum
Point (which we have just found) 
p = Pilot's C.G. Distance from Datum 
Point (which is given in the C. of A.) 
v = the loaded C.G. position which we 
want to rind.
We know all these quantities except y. 
If we imagine the glider hanging by a rope 
attached to its loaded C.G., it will exactly 
balance, and this rope can be represented 
by the arrow P + W. The tension in the 
rope is clearly P -f W which equals the 
All-Up Weight (A.U.W.)
Tate moments about the Datum Point: 
Wx = (P 4- W)y + Pp
Wx   pp
Therefore y =      . 
P + W
This gives us y. If this comes between 
limits, then all is well. If it does not, then 
we shall have to investigate further. Before
-26
y + p
From this we can find what Pilot Weight 
P gives us the maximum aft C.G. position.
It should be clear now why we have con- 
sidered the Minimum Pilot Weight case 
before discussing the Maximum Pilot 
Weight case where the C.G. comes out in 
front of the permitted forward limit. All we 
have to do in this latter case is to repeat the 
above check, using the forward limit for y 
instead of the aft limit. This will give the 
Maximum Pilot Weight that can be carried 
unless ballast is fixed to the tail of the glider.
All the details of Empty Weight, 
Maximum All-Up Weight, Maximum and 
Minimum Pilot Weight must be displayed 
on a placard in the cockpit. The best plan 
is to position this information beside the 
Flight Limitations Card, in the cockpit. By 
this means the pilot has all the information 
which he must know about the glider, 
presented to him in one place instead of 
having to search around the cockpit for the 
facts on which his life may well depend.
Parachutes
second-hand Nylon canopy, new 
glider back-type pack and harness.
£31. 12. 6d.
(incl. new bag)
from
British Gliding Association, 
19 Park Lane, London, W.I

--- PAGE 34 ---
APPENDIX I. B.G.A. FORMS
ONE of the curses of civilisation is the 
multiplication of forms and paper-work 
that seems to surround every activity. 
Gliding is no exception, but the forms, etc. 
are not so very numerous, and when 
properly understood, they can actually save 
you time.
The first form is the Certificate of 
Airworthiness of the Glider, which we can 
call Exhibit A. This is the Birth Certificate 
of your glider and on the front page are all 
the details of when, where, and by whom 
the glider was built. Also on page 1 of the 
Certificate, usually called the C. of A. is 
the name of the Owner of the machine. 
Turning the page we find a series of 
dimensions of the aircraft and a list of the 
maximum and minimum weights that the 
machine may carry. Items 19 to 21 a are 
concerned with the Centre of Gravity 
Position and these details are of vital 
importance. If the machine undergoes any 
large repairs it will have to be reweighed and 
the position of the empty C.G. as listed in 
Item 21 will almost certainly be found to 
have moved slightly. This will mean that 
the Max. and Min. weights, Items 20 and 
20a will have to be revised. You may not 
alter these figures yourself, but you must 
send the results of your weighing to the 
B.G.A. and they will make the necessary 
amendments. The B.G.A. will usually want 
the results of the weighing signed up by an 
Approved Inspector, and his calculations 
of the new Max. and Min. weights.
You may feel that we have spent rather a 
long time talking about this business of 
C.G. but it is important. It is literally of 
vital importance. 
The consequences of 
flying a glider with the C.G. outside the 
limits may well result in death.
Proceeding farther, we find a list of the 
speeds that the machine may not exceed in 
various states of flight, and some informa- 
tion on what the machine may or may not 
do in the way of aerobatics and cloud 
flying. These items have to be displayed in 
the cockpit of the gliders as also do the 
items about the C.G., but more of this 
later.
The last page of the C. of A. is mainly 
taken up by a table which gives the validity 
of the C. of A. and when it next expires. 
There are also some admonitions to the
effect that you must not alter anything in 
the Certificate yourself, that you must not 
exceed the stated limitations of the glider, 
and that you must notify the B.G.A. if you 
take the glider out of the U.K. at any time.
The B.G.A. have a duplicate of your 
C. of A. at the London Headquarters, but 
take care of your Certificate because it is an 
important document.
Now, no reputable Club in this country- 
will allow you to fly your glider at their site 
unless the C. of A. is valid and has not 
expired. It may be a nuisance to have to 
produce the C. of A. document every time 
you wish to establish its validity, so, when 
the C. of A. is renewed, the B.G.A. will 
send you a small card, which we may call 
Exhibit B, which must be fixed in the 
cockpit and states the expiry date of the 
C. of A. Do not think, therefore, that when 
the Manager or C.F.I, of a strange Club 
asks to see your cockpit card, that he is 
merely being officious. He is safeguarding, 
not only the reputation of his Club, but 
your continued well-being also.
You may well want to fly directly the 
C. of A. overhaul has been completed, 
and to enable you to do this, the B.G.A. 
have provided a temporary card, coloured 
orange, which the Inspector may fill in and 
fix in the cockpit, to tide you over until the 
C. of A. is received back from the B.G.A. 
This card is shown as Exhibit C. It is also 
known as Form Insp/3.
Now, as stated above, the information on 
speeds, weights, etc., has to be displayed in 
the cockpit of the glider, and to save you 
trouble, and also to provide this informa- 
tion in more or less standardised form the 
B.G.A. has devised standard placards for 
this purpose.
The first one, Exhibit D, contains the 
Flight Limitations section from the C. of A. 
and is applicable to all gliders. When we 
come to weight limitations there is a further 
complication in that there are tandem two- 
seaters to consider. 
So, for all single 
seaters, and two-seaters where the pilots 
sit side by side, we use the card shown as 
Exhibit E. In these types all the disposable 
load in the way of pilots is put into the 
glider at one particular point, so all we are 
concerned with is whether or not this total 
weight is within the limits allowed. From
—27—

--- PAGE 35 ---
the point of view of tandem two-seaters, 
however, we have two separate points 
where this load can be applied; the front 
cockpit and the rear. Clearly, the Centre of 
Gravity is affected, not only by how much 
weight we put into the glider, but also by 
where we put it in. To avoid complicated 
graphs, etc., the B.G.A. has devised the 
second Loading Limitations card, Exhibit 
F. This assumes that the glider can only be 
flown solo from the front cockpit, which is 
true of all gliders of normal configuration. 
On the left-hand side of the card is a table 
of various weights of Rear cockpit load, 
and against each value is the Max. and 
Min. load that the Front cockpit can carry. 
If these figures are not exceeded then the 
C.G. of the glider will be within the correct 
limits.
The above are all the forms that you are 
likely to meet in the course of everyday 
flying. 
There are some others, however, 
and the first of these is the INSP/2 form, 
Exhibit G. 
This is the form that the 
Inspector uses when he has overhauled 
your glider and is recommending it for 
renewal of its C. of A. to the B.G.A. The 
front page is taken up by, at the top, a few 
details of the aircraft itself, and, lower down 
a list of various parts of the glider and what 
has been done to them to bring the glider 
up to scratch. On the reverse side of the 
form are some things that the Inspector has 
to certify that he has done. 
These are 
mostly self-explanatory, but one of them 
does require a little elaboration. You will 
notice that the Inspector has to certify that 
the glider was last weighed on such and such 
a date and that, since then, no repairs or 
modifications have been carried out which 
appreciably affect this. If any such repairs 
or modifications have been carried out, 
then the glider has got to be re-weighed, 
and in this case the Inspector has to fill in 
the results of the new weighing at para. g(2). 
The B.G.A. will not renew the C. of A. 
unless they are satisfied on this point.
You may, one day want to get Approval
from the B.G.A. so that you can exercise 
the powers of an Approved Inspector, and 
overhaul your own, or other people's 
gliders, and recommend them for renewal 
of C. of A.
In this case you will have to make 
application to the B.G.A., and you do this 
on the form INSP/1, Exhibit H. This is a 
fairly simple form with a long list of 
questions to be answered. They are mainly 
concerned with your previous experience 
on aircraft. Two items do perhaps need a 
little explanation, and these are the Section 
E of the British Civil Aviation Require- 
ments, and A.P.2662A. The Air Registra- 
tion Board have drawn up a list of Require- 
ments to be met by all British aircraft. 
These Requirements are split up into 
Sections on Aeroplanes, Engines, Radio, 
Licensing, Safety Harness, etc. Section E 
is the one which deals with gliders and you 
should get hold of a copy. It deals, not 
only with the requirements in the way of 
the strength of the machines, but also in the 
matter of handling in the air, and various 
other aspects affecting the safety of the 
machine. It can be obtained from H.M.S.O. 
The A.P. 2662A we have discussed earlier 
on in this book, but you will find it an 
invaluable help. It is Restricted, so you 
cannot just walk into a shop and buy it. 
The B.G.A. will get you a copy, however, 
if you apply to them. In it you will find no 
end of useful information, and various 
worked out schemes for repairs. Almost 
every repair you are ever likely to have to 
tackle can be found in this book if you are 
prepared to use your intelligence by 
selecting a piece of this Scheme and a piece 
of that Scheme to fit the particular job you 
are repairing.
Well, there you are. Not such a for- 
midable list really is it? Remember, a lot of 
thought has gone into the preparing of these 
forms to cut out all the unnecessary paper 
work, and if you use them with intelligence 
you will find that they do save you time and 
trouble.
-28-

--- PAGE 36 ---
Exhihit A.
BRITISH GLIDING ASSOCIATION GLIDER
CERTIFICATE OF AIRWORTHINESS No..
1. Type of Glider.................................... 2. No. of Seats........
3. Year of Construction........................... 4. Constructor's No.
5. Constructor .............
6. Address of Constructor
7. Place of Construction.
8. 
Owner/s ...................
9. Address of Owner/s.
10. Changes of Ownership ...........
(See Notes 1 & 2 back page)
-29-

--- PAGE 37 ---
Exhibit A.
11. Classification......................................................................................
(Non-Aerobatic/Semi-aerobatic/Aerobatic/Cloud-Flying/Non-Cloud Flying)
12. 
Maximum Span.................................... ft.........................ins.
13. 
Maximum Length .............................. ft.........................ins.
14. TotalHeight ....................................... ft.........................ins.
15. Weight Empty .......................................................................................Ib.
15A Permanent Ballast .................................................................................Ib.
16. 
Max. Permissible Load........................................................................... Ib.
16A Min. Permissible Load........................................................................... Ib.
17. 
Max. Total Weight Authorised..................................................................Ib.
18. The Datum point is defined as........................................................................
19. The Centre of Gravity at all flying weights to be within the limits, 
and......................................-aft of the datum point.
20. When flown by pilots weighing less than......................................................Ib.
(including 201b. parachute if worn) ballast must be carried securely attached to the 
seat/nose to maintain the horizontal position of the centre of gravity within the 
prescribed limits.
20A When flown by pilots weighing more than...................................................lb.
(including 20 Ib. parachute if worn) ballast must be securely attached to the glider in 
an approved manner to maintain the horizontal position of the centre of gravity within 
the prescribed limits, but the maximum total flying weight must not exceed
.Ib.
21. In the weight empty condition of Item 15, the horizontal position of the centre of
gravity is.......
aft of datum.
-30—

--- PAGE 38 ---
Exhibit A.
21 A The horizontal position/s of the centre/s of gravity of the pilot/s may be taken as : 
Front Pilot/s...........................aft/forward of datum
Rear Pilot..............................aft/forward of datum
THE FOLLOWING DETAILS MUST BE CLEARLY PLACARDED IN THE 
PILOT'S COCKPIT AND BE VISIBLE TO THE PILOT IN THE FLYING POSITION
The following indicated air speeds must not be exceeded : (Units : knots, m.p.h., 
k.p.h.)
22. Aero-tow .................................... 25. Air Brakes Open........................
23. Winch-tow ................................. 26. Air Brakes Closed.....................
24. Auto-tow .................................... 27. In rough air..............................
28. The above indicated speeds are related to the following airspeed indicator
installation: Pitot.......................... Static.
29. The breaking load of the weak link in the towing cable must not exceed 
..................................................................Ibs.
["is not permitted to undertake cloud flying
30A The glider •< is permitted to undertake cloud flying when fitted with an altimeter and 
l_a turn and bank indicator.
30s Acrobatic manoeuvres are not permitted/The following acrobatic manoeuvres are 
permitted ................................................................................................
31 A Any major repairs or modifications to this glider which are not certified by a B.G.A. 
Approved Inspector or by a member of B.G.A. Approved Repair Organisation will 
invalidate this Certificate.
31s The following items are to be placarded on the glider: 15, 16, 16A, 17.
The following items are to be placarded in the cockpit so that the pilot can easily 
see them in the flying position: 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.

--- PAGE 39 ---
Exhibit A.
31c The British Gliding Association must be notified if this glider is at any time taken 
outside the United Kingdom.
31 D This certificate is only valid subject to the operational limitations stated hereon not 
being exceeded.
This Certificate is valid for the periods shown hereunder.
for THE BRITISH GLIDING ASSOCIATION.
Date of Issue-••• ...................................... 
....................................... Secretary.
Certificate valid 
From 
To
Date
Signature
Notes : 1. NO ENTRIES OR ENDORSEMENTS MAY BE MADE ON THIS DOCUMENT, EXCEPT
BY THE BRITISH GLIDING ASSOCIATION. 
2. 
THIS CERTIFICATE MUST BE RETURNED TO THE BRITISH GLIDING ASSOCIATION
WHEN : 
(a) A renewal is required, (b) The glider is written off or 
(c) on change of Ownership.
THE BRITISH GLIDING ASSOCIATION
Londonderry House,
19, Park Lane, 
London, W.I.
-32 

--- PAGE 40 ---
Exhibit B.
Exhibit E.
BRITISH GLIDING ASSOCIATION 
CERTIFICATE OF AIRWORTHINESS
No............................
Valid to..........................................
Exhibit C.
INSP/3
BRITISH GLIDING ASSOCIATION
Glider No.: B.G.A........................................
I have completed the C of A inspection on this 
aircraft and the application for Certificate of 
Airworthiness is being made.
Signed.....................................
Insp. No...................... 
Date.
Exhibit D.
FLIGHT LIMITATIONS
GLIDER No. B.G.A.............
CATEGORY: Non-Aerobatic/semi-Aerobatic/ 
Acrobatic
THE FOLLOWING INDICATED AIRSPEEDS 
(knots/mph/kph) MUST NOT BE EXCEEDED:
WINCH LAUNCH..........
AUTO TOW LAUNCH. 
AERO TOW LAUNCH....
AIR BRAKES OPEN..........
AIR BRAKES CLOSED....
IN ROUGH AIR.
CLOUD FLYING is/is not permitted provided 
Altimeter and Turn & Slip Indicator are fitted. 
The following manoeuvres are permitted :- 
LOOP, STALL TURN, TIGHT TURN (3Jg.)( 
SPIN.
Breaking load of weak link in towing cable not 
to exceed...........................Ib.
The above speeds are related to the following 
pitot static installation :.................................
LOADING LIMITATIONS
GLIDER No. B.G.A.............
Empty Weight 
Max All-Up Weight
Ib 
Ib.
The C.G. is within the permitted limits if the loading 
is as follows :—
MAX. COCKPIT LOAD 
... 
............... Ib.
MIN. COCKPIT LOAD 
... 
............... Ib.
Ballast must be carried forward/aft if cockpit load is 
less/more than...............lb., but the Max. All-Up
Weight must not be exceeded
Exhibit F.
LOADING LIMITATIONS
GLIDER No. BG.A ...............
Empty Weight 
... 
... 
...............Ib.
Max. All-Up Weight 
... 
...............Ib.
SOLO FLYING FROM FRONT COCKPIT 
ONLY
The C.G. is within the permitted limits if the loading 
is as follows :
Rear Cockpit Load 
Front Cockpit
 Max. Load 
Min 
Load 
Ib. 
Ib. 
Ib.
0 
............... ...............
100 
............... ...............
120 
............... ...............
140 
............... ...............
160 
............... ...............
180 
............... 
...............
200 
............... ...............
220 
............... ...............
240 
............... ...............
—33—

--- PAGE 41 ---
Exhibit G.
THE BRITISH GLIDING ASSOCIATION
B.G.A. Form No. INSP/2.
INSPECTOR'S REPORT FOR RENEWAL OF CERTIFICATES OF AIRWORTHINESS
Type of Glider....................................... B.G.A. No...........................................
Constructor........................... ...........................................................................
Constructor's No. ................................. Date Built ..........................................
Date of expiry of previous C. of A. ........................................................................
Owner's Name and Address.................................................................................
Item 
Condition before Overhaul and Action Taken 
1. 
Timber 
.. 
.. 
.. .....................................................................
2. Glued Joints
3. Plywood
4. Paintwork
5. 
Fabric
6. Metal Fittings and Pins
7. 
Control Components and Pins
8. 
Control Cables
9. Lift Struts
10. 
Quick Releases 
.. 
.. .....................................................................
11. Skids .. 
.. 
.. 
.. .....................................................................
12. Wheel,Tyre .. 
.. 
.. .....................................................................
13. Pilot's Harness 
.. 
.. .....................................................................
14. 
Crash Pad 
.. 
.. 
.. .....................................................................
15. 
Instruments 
.. 
.. 
.. .....................................................................
16. Transparency of Cockpit Covers.....................................................................
[P.T.O. 
-34-

--- PAGE 42 ---
Exhibit G. 
What repairs or modifications have been carried out since the issue of the last C. of A.?
REMARKS :— 
............................................................................................
In addition to the above I certify that :—
(a) The Flying Controls have been checked for ease of movement, rigidity, wear and 
correct angular movements in the agreed senses.
(b) 
The B.G.A. Number is painted on the Fuselage near the Tailplane.
(c) 
The Aircraft has been properly cleaned out after repair.
(d) Placards giving classification, permitted manoeuvres and operating speeds are clearly 
displayed in the Cockpit.
(e) 
Details of empty and maximum all up weight are placarded in the Cockpit or painted
on the Fuselage. 
(/) I have examined the Log Book ; it is up to date and contains a record of all repairs and
modifications which have been carried out and these have been signed for by an
approved person.
I have signed the Log Book. The Log Book shows : 
....................................hours 
"1
>  
Total Flying since new. 
....................................launches J
(g) According to the Log Book and previous C. of A.
the Glider was weighed on ...........................
(date) which included the equipment given in 
Column 1. (please fill in No. of Items)
Empty Weight was.....................lb.
Empty C. of G. was..................ins. aft/fore of
datum.
Cross out Either (1) Since then no repairs or 
modifications have been 
carried out which appreci- 
ably affect this.
Or 
(2) The Glider, after the recent 
repairs or modifications, 
has been re-weighed on 
................ ..(date) which
included 
the 
equipment 
given in Column 2. (Please 
fill in No. of Items).
Empty Weight was.............................. lb.
A.S.I.
Col. 
1 Col. 2
(h) 
(0
Date.
Empty C. of G. was..............................ins.
aft/fore of datum.
In my opinion this Glider is airworthy and I recommend that its C. of A. be renewed.
I enclose previous MCA/BGA (cross out where inapplicable) C. of A. and a renewal
Fee of £1 Is. Od./£2 2s. Od.
I have signed the Inspector's Card, Insp./3, and placed it in the Cockpit
Signed-.... ..................................... 
B.G.A. Insp. No.........................
Address..........................................................................................
—35-

--- PAGE 43 ---
Exhibit H.
BRITISH GLIDING ASSOCIATION
B.G.A. FORM No. INSP/1
This form to be completed by all applicants 
for B.G.A. Inspection Approval.
Name and address
of applicant 
..................................................................
Are you over 21 years of age? 
.........
Are you a member of a Gliding Club? 
If so, which? .................................
Are you at present authorised by your Committee or Chief 
Instructor to carry out any inspections?
If so, give details and references ....................................
What is your present occupation? ..
Do you at present hold any A.R.B. 
or other licence? ....................
What licence or approval have you 
previously held? 
...................
Give details of service in Forces if 
relevant to this application
Have you ever worked at an Aircraft Factory or Repair Organisation? 
If so, with whom and for how long? 
..........................................
Have you any knowledge of wire or rope splicing? 
................................................
Are you familiar with the British Civil Aviation requirements,
Section E? 
.................................
or A.P. 2662 A? ...........................
Give a short summary of repair work you have already carried out yourself and mention 
types of aircraft the repairs were carried out on ...................................................
The following references are attached 
1. 
.........................................................
2. 
.........................................................
Date :.............................. 
Signed :......................................................
Please return the form to :
British Gliding Association, 
The fee for approval is £2 2. 0.
19 Park Lane,London, W.I. 
Annual renewal 
... £1 
1. 
0.
—36—

--- PAGE 44 ---
APPENDIX II. 
A LIST OF USEFUL ADDRESSES 
OF SUPPLIERS
A.G.S. 
Parts, etc.
Aircraft Materials Ltd., Midland Road, London, N.W.I.
Air Publications.
A.D.2662A. "Standard Repairs to Airframes" from the B.G.A.
E.G.A. 
19 Park Lane, London, W.I.
B.C.A.R. Section E.
Air Registration Board, Chancery House, Chancery^Lane, W.C.2.
Bolts, Nuts, Screws, etc.
Guest Keen & Nettlefolds Ltd., Birmingham, 18.
Dopes, Paints.
Titanine Ltd., Colindale, London, N.W.9. 
Cellon Ltd., Kingston on Thames, Surrey. 
Docker Bros., Ladywood, Birmingham, 16.
Fabrics for Glider Covering.
A. H. Vane & Co., Empire House, St. Martin le Grand, London, 
E.C.I.
Glider Manufacturers.
Elliots of Newbury Ltd., Newbury, Berks. 
Slingsby Sailplanes Ltd., Kirbymoorside, Yorks.
Glues.
Messrs. Aero Research, Ltd., Duxford, Cambridge.
Plywood Glider Manufacturers.
Quick Releases.
Ottley Motors Ltd., Crescent Works, Crescent Road, Wood Green, 
London, N.22.
Ropes, Nylon, for Aerotowing.
British Ropes Ltd., Leith, Edinburgh, 6.
Tapes, Masking, Sealing, etc.
Johnson & Johnson Ltd., Slough, Bucks.
Timber for Repairs.
Glider Manufacturers.
-37-

--- PAGE 45 ---
are
you 
going
UP in
the
world?
Top people, particularly in the 
gliding world, know that they move 
in a rarefied atmosphere and to survive at all they 
have to take oxygen with them. These people know how 
to reach the heights in gliding; they also know that the 
best way to take oxygen is in the British Oxygen Aro A. 12 
or A.14 diluter demand set. Giving maximum economy and 
duration, completely automatic operation and greater safety 
at high altitudes, they are just what one needs to explore 
that wandering wave or achieve that absolute altitude.
As fitted to OLYMPIA 419 (1958 World Championships)
SKYLARK 3 
T.42 EAGLE
(W. S. Ivans 
42220 ft.) 
(H. C. N. Goodhart 37000 ft.)
I 23
British Oxygen Aro Equipment
THE PINNACLES   HARLOW • ESSEX • HARLOW 26891
-38-

--- PAGE 46 ---
INDEX
Aerodux, 9
Aerolite, 9
Aerotow, locking of hooks, 13
Aileron horn, 22
A.S.I., 24
Approved Certificate, 6
Approved Inspector, 24
Approved Materials, 6
B
Ball races, 17
Bearings, 17 
Biscuits, 12 
Blooming of dope, 18 
Bobbin, 15 
Bolts, 4, 5, 17 
Booms, 7 
Brass tacks, 12 
Bushes, 17
Cables, 2, 15, 24
Cable splicing, 15
Canopy, 20
Cantilever, 21, 22
Casein glue, 2, 8
Centre of Gravity, 7, 24, 26
Centre of Pressure, 21
Certificate of Airworthiness, 23, 27, 29
Chamfers, 10, 12
Clamps, 10
Classification of Gliders, 30
Cockpit, 24, 27
Compression shake, 22, 23
Controls, 15
Cotton fabrics, 18
Corrosion, 1, 2, 5
Cracks, 10, 22
Damage, 22 
Datum point, 25 
Diagonal ply, 11 
Diagonals, 21 
Dopes, 6, 18 
Drag bracing, 21 
Drawings, 7
Elevator, 2
Eyesplice, 15
D
E
Fabric work, 19
Fabrics, 2, 18 
Fairleads, 15 
Fatigue, 13, 15 
Feather edge, 10 
Finishes, 19, 20 
Fittings, 2, 13, 24 
Flush insertion repair, 12 
Forms, 27 
Frames, 21 
Fungus, 2, 8 
Fuselage, 21
Glues, 8
Grain, 11 
Grease, 1 
Gussets, 7
H
Hardeners, 9
Heating, 9 
Heavy landings, 21 
Hinges, 1, 17 
Hooks, release, 1, 13
I
Inspection for damage, 21
Instruments, 2 
Internal protection, 8
Lapped joint, 10, 11
Leading edge, 21, 22 
Limitations, 27, 32 
Links, 3, 14 
Locking, 3, 4 
Locking wire, 3 
Locknuts, 5 
Longerons, 21 
Looseness, fittings, 23 
Lubrication, 1
M
Madapolam, 18
Max. and Min. Loads, 25, 27 
Metal parts, 13 
Mixing of glues, 8, 9
Nip, 17
Nuts, 4, 5 
-39 
N

--- PAGE 47 ---
LIGHTWEIGHT OXYGEN 
EQUIPMENT 
.
NORMALAIR lightweight oxygen equipment 
was fitted in the sailplane flown by the runner-up in 
the Open Class at the 
1958 World Gliding 
Championships Commander N. Goodhart of Great 
Britain. This pilot also achieved the greatest distance 
flown along a set line, with a flight of 209 kilometres.
The equipment used is part of a range of items 
being produced by NORMALAIR for use in light 
aircraft, small transport aircraft and sailplanes. 
Both portable sets and fixed installations are in 
production, 
component 
design 
allowing 
wide 
variation of layout to suit individual requirements.
A feature common to all the equipment in this 
range is very low weight. 
For example, a fixed 
installation of 750 litres capacity weighs as little as 
12J Ibs. complete. Provision is made in all cases for 
the selection of different flow rates, the actual rates 
being variable by adjustment during manufacture. 
An illustrated catalogue of this equipment 
is 
available on request.
YEOVIL
Normalair (Canada) Ltd 
Toronto
ENGLAND
Normalair (Australia) Pty. Ltd 
Mel bourne
-40-

--- PAGE 48 ---
o
Oiling, 1
Oils, 1
Ottfur, 13
Over centre mechanism, 14
Oversize pins, 13
Paint, 2, 6
Patches, 10, 19
Perspex, 20
Pickling of dope, 18
Pins, safety, 5
Pins, split, 4, 5
Pins, wing, 5
Placards, cockpit, 26, 27, 30, 31
Plywood, 2, 11
Pressure, clamping, 8, 9
Publications, 27
Pulleys, 1, 17
R
Reaming, 13
Reclamation of fittings, 13 
Release Note, 6 
Reinforcing strip, 11 
Renewal of C. of A., 23 
Repairs, 6, 9, 10, 11, 13 
Requirements, 29 
Ribs, 10, 18 
Rigidity. 6 
Rust, 1
Thimble, 15 
Thinners anti chill, 18 
Threads in bearing, 5 
Threads in shear, 5 
Timber, 2, 9 
Turnbuckles, 3 
Types of glider, 21 
Tyres, 24
U
Ultra violet light, 2, 18
W
Washers, 4, 5 
Wear, 14, 24 
Weighing, 25 
Weights, 24, 25 
Welding, 13 
Wheels, 24
Whipping of splices, 16 
Wire, drag, 21 
Wire, locking, 3
Year of construction, 29
Safety, turnbuckles, 3
Sanding, 8
Scarfs, ply, 11
Scarfs, timber, 10
Shear, 8
Skids, 13
Spar, 7, 21
Splices, 6, 10
Splicing cable, 15
Spruce, 10
Steel, mild, 13
Steel, high tensile, 13
Strength of glue, 9
Struts, 21
Swaged end splice, 3, 15
Tack strip, 12
Tacks, 12 
Tailplane, 21 
Testing of materials, 6 
Tension, glue in, 8 
Tension of cables, 2
—41-

--- PAGE 49 ---
THE B.G.A. AIRWORTHINESS SCHEME
by C. O. Vernon
in flight, and in this connection
flight includes launching and landing, 
depends on three factors only the air- 
worthiness of the glider, the method of 
operation of the glider, and the pilotage. 
That the latter must be sufficiently skilful 
and accurate is obvious enough; the 
operational factor is looked after by the 
B.G.A. Operational Regulations. In this 
chapter we are concerned with the air- 
worthiness of the glider.
The procedure adopted by the B.G.A., 
as by all other airworthiness bodies, is to 
require that certain standards of design 
(including structural strength, stiffness and 
flying qualities) and construction are met; 
when satisfactory evidence of the achieve- 
ment of these standards is received, a 
Certificate of Airworthiness, or a renewal 
thereof, is issued in respect of each and 
every glider. 
Much more evidence is 
required in the case of a new prototype 
than for a series aircraft or for a renewal.
A Certificate of Airworthiness, or C. of A., 
can be obtained either from the B.G.A., or 
from the Ministry of Transport and Civil 
Aviation (M.T.C.A.) in conjunction with 
the Air Registration Board (ARE).
This applies whether the glider is designed 
and built by a firm or privately, save that 
B.G.A.'s C. of A. cannot be issued for 
gliders of more than 1,250 Ibs. all up weight. 
The B.G.A. C. of A. document is described 
in Appendix I and illustrated in Exhibit A. 
A C. of A. automatically becomes invalid 
if its period of validity (usually one year) 
expires, if the glider is damaged such that 
in the opinion of an Approved Inspector it is 
no longer airworthy, or if unauthorised 
modifications (other than minor ones) are 
made.
At the present time, it is not a legal 
requirement that gliders must have C's. of 
A. unless they are to be used for public 
transport or aerial work. It is, however, 
necessary that third-party insurance, by an 
authorised insurer and for an amount of 
liability of not less than £3,000, is in force. 
It is also a B.G.A. Operational Regulation 
that a glider may be flown at the site of a 
B.G.A. member club only if it has a valid 
C. of A. (either M.T.C.A. or B.G.A.) or 
equivalent Service document.
Certificate of Airworthiness Renewal
The procedure for a C. of A. renewal is 
described in detail from the practical point 
of view in Chapter 8, and is hence con- 
sidered only briefly here; it is broadly as 
follows.
The glider is examined by an Approved 
Inspector who decides the extent of the 
overhaul necessary to ensure that it will 
remain airworthy for another twelve 
months, subject to adequate maintenance 
being provided and to any damage being 
made good.
When the overhaul is completed satis- 
factorily, the inspector sends the necessary 
documents to the B.G.A., who then re- 
validate the C. of A. for a period of one 
year from the date of the inspection.
Certificate of Airworthiness for 
New Type Glider
As indicated above, the procedure for 
obtaining a C. of A. for a new prototype 
is much more extensive, and involves certain 
checks of the design and construction of 
the glider, which must be to the current 
issue of B.C.A.R. Section E, except as 
otherwise notified or agreed by the B.G.A. 
The procedure differs in some respects 
according to whether the glider is designed 
and constructed privately or by an approved 
manufacturer. An approved manufacturer 
is one having design and inspection 
organisations approved by the B.G.A., for 
the purpose of which approval, the B.G.A. 
adopts as requirements, the relevant A.R.B. 
requirements, only. 
B.C.A.R. Chapters 
A 7-1 and A 7-5. A manufacturer approved 
by the B.G.A. is generally approved by the 
A.R.B. also.
To make the actual procedure easier to 
follow, some of the terms used are first 
defined.
First, the Type Record. 
This is a 
document prepared by the designer as a 
summary of the design, comprising:
(a) The Certificate of Design, i.e. a 
certificate 
in 
the 
form 
shown 
(SEE OVER) and signed by the 
designer.
(b) A three-view G.A. (General Arrange- 
ment) drawing. 
42 

--- PAGE 50 ---
CERTIFICATION OF DESIGN 
Pro-forma for Certification of Design
Aircraft Type .......................... Category..............................
Constructors' Serial No................. E.G.A. Serial No.......................
I certify that, with the exceptions stated below, the above aircraft is of a design which 
complies with B.C.A.R. Section E. dated..........................................
and the additional requirements which have been notified in writing by the B.G.A. as 
applying to this aircraft and which are listed or referred to below.
Exceptions ............................ Additional Requirements................
Date
(Signed) . 
(Firm) ... 
(Address)
(c) A list of component G.A. drawings 
and issue numbers.
(d) A summary of design assumptions, 
i.e. a statement of the leading 
dimensions and principal aerody- 
namics and weight data upon which 
the design calculations are based. 
As a minimum it must include wing 
and tail unit geometry, all up weight 
and C.G. positions, moments of 
inertia, weight breakdown assumed 
in 
strength 
calculations, 
design 
speeds (stall, dive, etc.), lift and drag 
estimates, pitching movement of 
wing and fuselage, downwash at tail- 
plane, and spanwise lift, distribution 
of wing.
(e) A strength and stiffness summary, 
i.e. a statement of design loads, 
critical cases, reserve factors achieved 
and stiffnesses achieved, for all 
primary structure components, in- 
cluding references to design criteria 
and assumptions on which the 
calculations are based.
(f) The weighed weight and C.G. 
position and the loading data 
(maximum and minimum cockpit 
loads) determined therefrom.
(g) References to strength, stiffness, and 
other pre-flight test reports, or the
reports themselves, or the test results, 
as appropriate. The tests required 
are stated in the Design Requirements, 
i.e. in B.C.A.R. Section E. 
(h) References to Flight Test Reports or 
the reports themselves. Again, the 
tests required are given in B.C.A.R. 
Section E.
Secondly, the Design Survey. This is an 
examination of the design by the B.G.A. to 
check as far as possible that the Design 
Requirements are complied with, particu- 
larly those requirements which are expressed 
in qualitative terms, e.g. those in the Design 
and Construction chapters of B.C.A.R. 
Section E. The Survey is carried out by a 
Design Surveyor appointed by the B.G.A. 
when each occasion arises, and who is 
usually a member of the Technical Com- 
mittee. The designer may wish to consult 
the Surveyor in the interpretation of the 
requirements concerned.
Thirdly, the Engineering Assessment. 
This is an appraisal of the glider by the 
B.G.A. at a suitable stage of construction 
at or near completion (but before covering). 
The appraisal embraces all engineering 
aspects of the glider not covered by the 
Design Survey, and is intended to ensure as 
far as possible that the glider will be able to 
be operated satisfactorily and maintained
—43-

--- PAGE 51 ---
in an airworthy condition without undue 
difficulty by the operators, be they clubs or 
private owners, for whom it is intended. 
The assessment is made by an Engineering 
Assessor who, again, is appointed by the 
B.G.A. as each occasion arises.
ThetDesign Survey and Engineering Assess- 
ment are, theoretically, distinct; in practice 
they may overlap to some extent.
The C. of A. procedure itself can now be 
described. The general procedure is defined 
first, and this is followed by the particular 
procedures for approved manufacturers and 
private constructors respectively, which, as 
noted above, differ somewhat.
In general terms, then, the steps to be 
taken are as follows.
1. The design of the glider is summarised 
in the Type Record.
2. The Design Survey is carried out; this 
may be in several stages.
3. The Engineering Assessment is carried 
out.
4. The completed glider is inspected by 
an Approved Inspector.
5. The completed glider is weighed and 
its Centre of Gravity determined.
6. Pre-flight tests are carried out.
7. Subject to (1), (4), (5) and (6) being 
satisfactory, the glider is test flown 
under the authority of a Permit to Fly 
issued by the B.G.A.
8. The Type Record, including the results 
of the weighing and the pre-flight tests, 
and the Flight Test Reports if not also 
included are submitted to the B.G.A., 
accompanied by an application form 
and the prescribed fee. 
They are 
studied together with the Design Survey 
and Engineering Assessment, and when 
they are all approved the type C. of A. 
is issued.
In the case of approved manufacturers, 
the glider may be flown under the authority 
of their approval alone, after a satisfactory 
inspection by the firm's inspection depart- 
ment and satisfactory completion of pre- 
flight tests and weighing, i.e., before the 
Design Survey and Engineering Assessment 
are made. In fact the glider may, in the 
absence of unorthodox features, be designed, 
constructed, and test flown without any 
reference whatever being made to the 
B.G.A. It is, however, to be recommended 
that the Survey and Assessment are made, at 
least partially, at a suitable stage before 
testing is begun, as this might avoid or
reduce subsequent delay in the granting of a 
C. of A. pending the rectification of some 
unacceptable feature. 
The Type Record 
need not be formally completed before the 
glider is flown, though the data from which 
it is compiled will normally be available, 
except of course for flight test reports.
In the case of private constructors, on the 
other hand, the Design Survey, Engineering 
Assessment and an inspection by a B.G.A. 
Approved Inspector must be made, and a 
partial Type Record compiled, before the 
glider is flown. When satisfied with these, 
the B.G.A. issues a Permit to Fly, whereupon 
flight tests may be carried out either by a 
B.G.A. Flight Test Group or by an indi- 
vidual approved for each specific case. In 
more detail, the procedure for obtaining the 
Permit to Fly is as follows: 
(i) The design surveyor makes his survey 
and accepts the partial Type Record, 
which must contain the results of the 
weighing and of the pre-flight tests, 
and reports to the B.G.A. 
(ii) The Engineering Assessor makes his 
assessment 
and reports 
to 
the 
B.G.A., either directly or, if appro- 
priate, through the Design Surveyor.
(iii) Subject to the partial Type Record, 
Design, Survey and Engineering Ass- 
essment being satisfactory, the B.G.A. 
issues the Permit to Fly, which 
specified 
the 
Test 
Group 
or 
individual pilot as necessary.
(iv) The Approved Inspector who has 
supervised the construction of the 
glider, gives the final approval after 
clearing the glider for flight.
From this point onwards, the procedure 
is similar for both approved manufacturers 
and private constructors. When the flight 
tests are concluded, the Type Record is 
completed and submitted, together with the 
Flight Test Reports (if not included therein) 
to the B.G.A. The latter then considers all 
the relevant reports and information, and, if 
satisfied, decides upon the various limita- 
tions and issues the C. of A. accordingly. 
In the event of any features being found to 
be unacceptable, the C. of A. will be 
conditional upon these being rectified, and 
if those features concern handling the 
C. of A. will normally be withheld until 
further flight tests are done.
The above procedures'and the records or 
44-

--- PAGE 52 ---
reports which must be furnished before 
flight testing may begin and before the
C. of A. can be issued, are summarised in 
the table (below).
Summary of procedure for type C. of A.
Type Record 
Design Survey 
Engineering Assessment 
. . 
Inspection (by B.G. A.) 
Weighing 
Pre-flight Tests 
Test Flights 
Test Flight Reports
Approved Manufacturers
Flight Test
No *
No 
Yes** 
Yes**
C. of A.
Yes
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes
Private Constructors
Permit to 
| 
C. of A. 
to Fly 
|
Yes*** 
j 
Yes 
Yes 
i 
  
Yes 
  
Yes 
  
Yes 
  
Yes 
  
  
i 
Yes 
  
i 
Yes
* 
Desirable but not essential.
•' * 
Reports need not be submitted at this stage.
= ** partial only at this stage.
Modifications
For the purpose of this book, modifica- 
tions may be considered to be of two 
kinds:
1. Those essential for safety, initiated by 
the manufacturer or by the B.G.A.
2. Those initiated by the owner or 
operator to improve performance or 
convenience or handling, and which 
may also affect safety.
As regards the first kind, all that need be 
said here is that instructions for their 
embodiment including in each case a state- 
ment of the urgency thereof are issued by 
the manufacturer or by the B.G.A. It is in 
the second kind that we are more interested.
The B.G.A. is concerned with this second 
kind, where safety is involved, but not 
otherwise. 
Any 
modification 
which 
affects safety automatically invalidates the 
C. of A. unless authorised by the B.G.A. In 
this connection, safety means all factors 
embraced within the heading of air- 
worthiness, including structural strength 
and stiffness, cockpit design, and flying 
characteristics. In other words, a modifica- 
tion which changes any of these requires 
B.G.A. approval, and it is therefore 
essential to consider, before any modifica-
tion is made, whether one or more of these 
qualities may be affected. If they are, the 
approval for such modifications must be 
sought. 
Examples of such modifications are:
(i) Those which alter the external shape, 
such as changes to windscreens or 
rudder horn balances, or the fitting of 
dorsal fins or airbrakes where more 
existed before.
(ii) Bungee trimmers or any kind of mass 
attached to control surfaces or 
control circuits.
(iii) Any installation involving cutting or 
piercing of primary or secondary 
structure, such as fitting a landing 
wheel where none existed before. 
Fitting of airbrakes may come into 
this category also.
(iv) Any installation involving increases 
in the loads to which the glider is 
subjected, such as the fitting of a 
belly-hook where none existed before.
Approval for modifications is given by 
the B.G.A. in conjunction with the manu- 
facturers of the glider where appropriate, 
after it is satisfied that the modification is 
airworthy. To enable the B.G.A. to decide 
this, the application, which should be in 
writing, should be accompanied by a 
 45 

--- PAGE 53 ---
description of the proposed modification, 
suitable drawings or sketches, and strength 
figures, or references to a manufacturer's 
approved drawings. As in the case of type 
C's. of A., the B.G.A. may require amend- 
ments or flight tests before granting 
approval.
In considering all this, a sense of pro- 
portion should of course be maintained. 
Purely minor modifications such as re- 
arrangement of instrument panel layout 
(provided that clearances are not adversely 
affected) or small local external protuber- 
ances or fairings do not need special 
approval. 
Difficulty may, however, arise 
in deciding what is minor or what is small; 
in cases of doubt the B.G.A. should be 
consulted.
Log Books
The log-book is the gliders' biography, 
and its proper keeping is an essential part 
of the Airworthiness Scheme. It should 
contain a record of the aircraft's operations 
and of the repairs, maintenance and 
modifications.
As regards operations, no great detail is 
necessary. An entry at suitable periods, e.g. 
monthly, of the number of launches and 
hours flown is all that is strictly necessary. 
It may be helpful also to note such things as 
heavy landings even though no immediate 
damage is evident; they may have "started" 
something that may get worse in subsequent 
bumps. If this does occur, it is essential that
it is found at the next C. of A. inspection, 
and the presence of such entries in the log 
book will lead the inspector to examine all 
the more thoroughly.
Repairs and maintenance form the most 
important entries, whether concerned with 
the C. of A. renewal or otherwise. It is 
essential to state just what has been done, 
and where it has been done, the entry 
should be sufficiently detailed to make this 
quite clear. For example, in the case of a 
rib boom repair, the site number, whether 
top or bottom boom, and whether in front 
of or behind the spar(s) should be stated. 
If a spar is repaired, the members affected 
(top boom, rear web, etc.) and the spanwise 
location should be given.
Minor repairs should also be mentioned; 
while in the case of several re-glued gussets, 
for example, the exact location of every one 
is not vital, at least the number and 
approximate position should be given. 
Quite simple maintenance items such as re- 
greasing of hinge pins or re-adjustment of 
control circuits should be recorded when 
the flying characteristics are likely to be 
affected.
In the case of modifications, a brief 
descriptive statement, together with a 
reference to a modification and/or drawing 
number, is all that is required in the case of a 
manufacturer's or B.G.A. modification, a 
suitable drawing is sufficient, but not 
necessarily full detail, should be attached 
to the log book.
B.G.A. Airworthiness Fees
C's of A. for Manufacturers prototype gliders 
C's of A. for Privately designed and constructed gliders. . 
C's of A. for Manufacturers production gliders 
C's of A. for other gliders
C's of A. for Foreign gliders
Renewals 
B.G.A. Members
Fee for Inspector's Approval
£5 
5s. 
Od. 
By arrangement 
£2 2s. 
Od. 
£2 2s. Od.
By arrangement 
£1 
Is. Od.
£2 2s. 
Od.
£2 2s. 
Od. 
£1 
Is. 
Od.
Printed in Great Britain by Young Myers & Co. Ltd. and F. A. Clements (Chatham) Ltd. of Harrow and 
Chatham, for the British Gliding Association.
