ingham Airport? You want an aerotow?". The Elder snatched the 
'phone from his hand and said " hut up, just answer Yes or No to my questions, 
whoever you are" but before he could go on he was interrupted "Ah, it's you... 
old boy. Come and fetch me with the Auster, it's all right, I've got permission from 
the Commandant, we were at school together. Here I'll put him on the line". 
Arrangements were made, information exchanged and future warnings given. 
Our hero explained that as he would have to wait for an hour or two until the tug 
arrived, he might as well invite the Commandant to a late lunch and suggested 
that a good bottle of claret would help his digestion. The offer was declined!

--- PAGE 123 ---
132 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
The Tug duly arrived and off they went. Just over Silver 'C' distance away, 
on track is East Midlands airport. Lucky really because that is where they ran 
out of fuel and had to land. The pity was that the Commandant there did not go 
to school with either of them! The other great pity is that The Elder' cannot 
remember the story! All that happened a long time ago and would certainly not 
occur today. Glider pilots take great care not to infringe airspace closed to them 
and keep a long way from the special areas which surround civilian and military 
airfields. Not only do they always carry the very latest air maps but with the 
Global Position System Instruments, they are able to pinpoint their exact 
location and height at all times. The modern pilot is very disciplined and 
conscious of the freedoms we enjoy and treasure.
"Please, Mister, can we have another ball please!". This story concerns two 
well to do gents who bought themselves a new French 'Pegase' single sealer 
and thought it fun to have it aerotowed back to Lasham. None of the Lasham 
tug pilots wanted the task as we were not sure that the new owners were up to 
the long tow back from the factory at Le Blanc. Bob Bickers, being made of 
sterner stuff, agreed and so the three pressed off in Bob's Rallye Commodore. 
Both pilots had one flight at Le Blanc to learn how to fly their new toy and 
mindful of their comfort, Bob used a 300 foot towrope as he thought that it 
would give them a smoother ride. The plot for the next day was to tow to Le 
Touquet on the French coast, have a little rest, swap pilots in the glider and 
then press on home. Bob now takes up the story:
"The day came and was obviously going to brew into at least a 500km day 
and it was really delightful to be alive. After ten minutes we had reached 2000 
feet and had more or less settled down. We then went through a strong 
thermal, a few moments later we encountered the next extremely strong 
thermal, the tug vario hit the top stop, moments later it became obvious that the 
glider was worryingly unstable on tow, a few more moments later I saw the 
glider in plan form through my rear view mirror and then the rope broke. An 
immediate 180 degree turn enabled me to see the Pegase going through the 
most amazing gyrations varying from flat spin through hammerhead stalls. 
After what seemed like ages the glider hit the ground, next to a thick wooded 
area in a flat attitude but spinning. I followed it down to the ground to see if the 
pilot was still in it but after snagging the rope, which I had forgotten about in the 
heat of the moment, and a thirty foot high fly past I was unsure as to whether 
he was in the cockpit or not. I made another approach to the field which was 
long enough to get into but I was unable to land as, through years of ploughing 
in the same direction, the ground undulated in a series of quite severe humps 
which were across my prospective landing direction. Pulling up again quickly to 
find another field it was obvious that I really had only one choice and that was 
a field with a wood on the undershoot and a trout farm lake on the overshoot. 
Just as I was totally committed I had a flash thought about getting out of the 
field again but was really more concerned for the poor glider pilot. The other 
pilot was contributing 'Oh My God' from the right hand seat. After a successful

--- PAGE 124 ---
Chapter Nineteen - \Ve have 'em, even if they are not all there___________133
touch down the wing then unloaded and the aircraft sank through a hard earth 
crust and came to a rapid halt. I jumped out and ran off in the direction of the 
glider. On my way through a small hamlet I managed to alert the local Fire 
Service with my "Au secours, au secours" and various other suitable French 
phrases. On arriving at the glider it was obvious that the pilot was elsewhere. 
As he was not in the field he had to be in the thick gorse bush wood which was 
only feet away. Some ten minutes later while being torn to pieces in the gorse 
I heard a siren approaching and went to the edge of the wood in time to see 
the glider pilot being whizzed past standing grinning from ear to ear on the back 
of the fire engine! Presuming he would be taken to the local hospital I sent his 
partner off to look after him and returned to the Rallye. We duly met up again 
at Le Blanc, the glider pilot totally undamaged, the partners unable to get a 
replacement Pegase there and then and so we flew home.
"What had happened was really very simple. When we went through the first 
thermal the pilot realised that his seat straps were undone and floating past his 
ears. He then put the stick between his knees and started doing them up. Then 
we hit the extremely strong thermal which caused him to lose control of the glider 
and then to be ejected through the canopy... Luckily, he had done his parachute 
straps up! I did not see him in the air under the canopy because the glider did not 
part the rope until some moments later and I immediately locked on to the glider. 
After an eventful trip home my offer to help them get the replacement glider was 
quickly countered with the fact that they were now going to buy a trailer!".
Sadly in all sports there are participants who for one reason or another 
cheat. We did suffer in days of old but with the new recording loggers utilising 
Global Positioning height, time and location information, this cannot happen 
again. To the best of my knowledge, only one competitor has ever been thrown 
out of a World Championship event and he fiddled his turning point 
photographs. There was a German pilot taking part in the German National 
Contest who landed in a field, persuaded his crew to de-rig the glider, then to 
drive on up the course for another hundred kilometres, re-rig in a field and thus 
he hoped to claim more points for distance. Unfortunately for him, the crew of 
another competitor saw him land in the first field, drove on but had a puncture a 
little while later and then were astonished to see the glider sitting fully rigged in 
the second field. The pilot had his competition licence revoked for ever! Britain 
had its share of rogues, or to be kind, maybe possibly non-achievers who 
develop a distinct 'Walter Mitty' persona. There was a celebrated case of 
malpractice perpetrated by one such who had himself a field day. On 9 May 
1972, he announced that he had broken the British Absolute Height and the 
Gain of Height records. He told the astonished British Gliding world that he was 
launched at Booker in a Skylark 4 and after climbing in a cu-nb to 27,000 feet, 
he contacted wave which took him into the stratosphere to a height of 40,600 
feet. His claims were duly accepted by the BGA and although our friend seemed 
very reluctant to discuss certain aspects of his flight, he revelled in the extensive 
publicity coverage. They do say that the criminal always comes back to the

--- PAGE 125 ---
134 
A Glidf-r Pilot Bold...
scene of the crime. Our man decided to have another bite of the cherry. He 
should have remembered Abraham Lincoln's famous speech at Clinton in 1858 
in which he said "You can fool all of the people some of the time, and some of 
the people all of the time, but you cannot fool all the people all of the time".
The first time round, British records; now a few years later, he claimed the 
World Absolute and Gain of Height records. The Press coverage was even 
more impressive than the last time, even the Readers Digest printed an article. 
The first record flight had made a number of pilots uneasy to say the least but 
this time however, noses around the movement were really twitching, most 
people agreed that something did not seem right, Roger Barrett, the Chairman 
of the EGA decided to act and sought the help of Scotland Yard's world famous 
forensic laboratory to compare and minutely examine the record breaking 
barograph chart. The official finding was that the trace had been created in a 
vacuum chamber. That together with additional evidence from independent 
observers resulted in the BGA refusing all the claims, and furthermore 
expunging the previous records accredited to the gentleman concerned. His 
FAI Sporting Licence was permanently withdrawn and no further claims for any 
type of certified gliding performance would ever be approved by the BGA.
There is an interesting sequel to the story which, of course, so my libel 
lawyer has asked me to state, has no connection with the record claim in any 
shape or form, or as they always state in the film world' has no connection with 
any person dead or alive'. It so happened that a little time after that a trailer 
complete with the Kestrel inside it, was found burning merrily on the far side of 
Booker airfield. By a strange coincidence, one of the syndicate partners owning 
the Kestrel was our friend of the height record affair. But there is more, some 
weeks later when the Police were dragging the River Thames near Henley 
looking for a body which they had reason to believe had been hidden there, 
they found the Kestrel instrument panel and parachute in their net.

--- PAGE 126 ---
Chapter 20
More Heroes
G
liding is a unique sport which stimulates the mind, develops the young 
and is an addictive drug! It combines four factors which are not present 
in many, if any other, forms of sport. It is a team sport on the ground as 
you need your fellow pilots and friends to help you, it is an individual sport in 
the air. It is a brawn sport on the ground as rigging and manhandling gliders 
can be hard work, especially if the pilot lands in an unsuitable field which forces 
him and his crew to carry the machines through heavy plough or over hedges, 
yet it is a brain sport in the air. After a racing closed circuit flight the pilot will 
feel mentally and physically tired but always highly elated. Somebody once 
said that a sport is only a sport if you can kick it, throw it, shoot it, jump it, kill it 
or watch it. I am delighted that in his eyes ours is not a sport. Surely the 
definition of sport in its simplest term is one in which man competes against 
man. We have the added advantage that in gliding, like sailing, that we also 
compete with, have to understand, interpret and then use weather conditions 
like few other sports. Gliding also attracts very many varied types of human 
beings, all of whom are 'doers' rather than 'watchers'.
Regretfully there is not room to write about all of the interesting characters with 
whom I have shared many a thermal over Britain but a very few must be recorded.
John Stanley Sproule started gliding with the Yorkshire Club in 1929, grew up 
to join Slingsby Sailplanes where he designed the Cadet and in 1938 together 
with Flight Lieutenant Bill Murray broke the British Duration Record by hill soaring 
the Dunstable Downs for 22 hours, 13 minutes and 35 seconds having launched 
at 4.09am. They hatched a plot to have food and drink lowered to them from 
another glider but this failed in glorious fashion. The open cockpit Slingsby 
Falcon 3 side by side two sealer which they were flying, had flying wires attached 
to the nose of the glider which were attached to the top of the outer wing struts. 
As their meals were lowered to them, they watched helplessly as invariably the 
string to which the packet was attached would be deflected past them and thus 
they had nothing to eat or drink during the whole flight. He must also have been 
the only pilot in the world to have had a tow behind an aircraft carrier. After the 
war their Lordships of the Admiralty decreed that not enough was known about 
the eddies created behind a carrier which made deck landing difficult in certain 
weathers. John successfully carried out five flights in the prototype Slingsby T.20, 
one of which was a shoulder launch off the deck into a stiff breeze. It was his 
interest, drive and determination after building and flying replica models of gliders 
designed by Sir George Cayley, (1773-1857) the true father of aviation, that 
created sufficient interest to build a full scale true replica of his man carrying 
glider which was the first in the world. Ken Fripp with his team at Southdown Aero 
Services built this remarkable machine in their workshop at Lasham. Our all 
singing and dancing hero Derek Piggott, who could not resist the challenge of a

--- PAGE 127 ---
136 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
new type, flew it first at Lasham and then for authenticity for the film being made 
about the inventor, in the actual dale in Yorkshire used by Cayley. Derek flew 
sitting 'side saddle' in the boat shaped fuselage just as Sir George's coachman 
had been ordered to do all those years ago.
Tivo of Sproule's inventions merit special attention. The first was his 'Dry 
swim trainer'. As a naval helicopter pilot and committed glider pilot he was 
always keen to encourage others to sample the joys of flying. At the Royal 
Naval Air Station at Ford in Sussex, now an open prison, he welded up a 
rectangular steel frame which was mounted on a twenty inch wide axle, and a 
nine foot long steel pole, which could tilt in every plane, was attached in the 
centre. He then built a twenty foot wing span glider which moved up and down 
the pole but was attached to a counter weight sliding inside the pole. The whole 
contraption was towed along the runway behind a Land Rover or some such 
vehicle and the pilot was taught to 'fly' the glider. It was a tremendous success 
and introduced many people to flying. Sadly, after John was posted back to 
sea, a keen, impetuous know-all pulled the stick back too quickly and 
unfortunately, as the verse in 'Wings for Prudence' says "Had he done his D. I. 
proper, he would not have come a cropper", as no one had carried out a 
thorough daily inspection, the wooden restraining plug flew off the top of the 
pole, like a tappen leaving a bear in early spring, followed closely by the glider!
His other invention in 1953 was the Sproule Net. At that time rescues were 
carried out by lowering a wire with a strop on the end of it to those being 
rescued, who then had to work out how to put the strop on. John had the idea 
of scooping the casualty out of the water and designed his famous net. His plan 
was to come up behind the person in the water and simply fish them out. While 
still perfecting the net, he heard that a Fairey Firefly was in trouble and about 
to ditch. John shot off to intercept and saw the aircraft go into the sea about six 
miles off Littlehampton. "Within 30 seconds of immersion" John reported "a 
very surprised pilot was in our net and being winched up to the helicopter 
where, cold and wet, he sat shivering until we delivered him to the front door of 
the sick bay at Ford". To test his invention, his WREN assistant, girl sailor or 
whatever they are called these days, helped out by swimming around out at 
sea and waiting until John fished. There was a story told that one day he came 
back to base with a somewhat irate 'civilian' in the net by mistake, but to be fair 
John always denied the story, albeit with a wry smile!
Major General Anthony Deane-Drummond DSO, MC with two bars is 
something else, surely the model for the first 'Action man'. Affectionately known 
as 'the Dean' or 'D squared', a former British Gliding Champion, he competed 
in numerous World Championships. He is the real 'father' of gliding at Lasham, 
who in 1950 stopped the solo training activities of the Army Gliding Club 
operation at Odiham airfield which had been plagued by numerous accidents. 
With John Free as the resident instructor and using their new much loved 
'Rudolph', a T.21 with a bright red nose, the club transferred to Lasham in June 
1951. He has lived a life fuller than most. His two autobiographies, Return

--- PAGE 128 ---
Chapter twenty - More heroes______________________________137
Ticket and Arrows of Fortune, relate the stories of his extraordinary wartime 
escapes in Sicily and later after the Arnhem landings where he hid in a 
cupboard in a German Officers Mess for thirteen days. His account of his time 
as Commanding Officer of 22 SAS regiment and the capture of a rebel 
stronghold on a seven thousand foot high mountain in Oman which had never 
been successfully achieved in recorded history, together with some of his 
gliding tales make fascinating reading. He is a tough hombre who can make 
grown men cry, even women, as Ann Welch can testify, but never seems to 
lose his cool. Except once, as a number of us can confirm.
During one National Championship held at Lasham, Tony DD and Paddy 
Kearon collided in cloud over Oxford. As DD was then a Brigadier and Paddy 
only a Group Captain, one rank below, the Dean called it insubordination and 
worse, an RAF plot to fix the Army! He flew out of cloud and radioed to anyone 
nearby to give him a report of the damage to the wing of his K.6 single seater. 
Reassured that only a quarter of one wing was missing, he went back into what 
had in the meantime developed into a full blown Cu-nb, turned the first turning 
point and pressed on to South Marston near Swindon for his second control 
point. By now the thunderstorm had killed off all the lift and with lots of others he 
was forced to land at South Marston airfield. For the first and only time I heard 
him curse and swear so vehemently that we wondered what would happen 
when he and Paddy next met but he pointed out that he was not concerned 
about the air to air, what really got to him was that all he wanted was one more 
good climb so that he could have got back to base to complete the task.
Real champions have to be totally dedicated with a fierce determination to 
win. One of these giants was Sir Peter Scott, the creator of the Severn Wildfowl 
Trust and the splendid World Wild Life campaign to protect endangered 
species, artist of note, sailor, and lots more besides who took to gliding like his 
beloved ducks do to water. He left nothing to chance, his attention to detail was 
awe inspiring. Everyone was keen to sit next to him at briefing or later when he 
took on the mantle of Chairman of the British Gliding Association as any piece 
of paper near him would invariably be covered with drawings of ducks. He had 
a lively, sometimes wicked, sense of humour and delighted in leaving in the 
cockpit a phoney list of coded position points to be radioed to his crew during 
Championships knowing full well that other pilots would slavishly copy them 
down. Then it was important to keep your crew informed of your location and 
prospects, without giving valuable information to your competitors, so that they 
could follow you as closely as possible in case of an out-landing followed by 
the mad rush back for a re-light. On one 300km task during the Aston Down 
National Championships, Peter and I were approaching the first turning point 
at Cerne Abbas in Dorset. A little later I called up "Mallard, KanKan, I can't see 
the naked giant" and back came Peter's radio message "KanKan, Mallard, you 
are now directly overhead his left testicle". Every pilot listening out on 130.4 
had a good laugh, for those of you who have never seen the imposing figure of 
the Giant which was carved in the hillside allegedly many hundred years ago,

--- PAGE 129 ---
138 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
it is a grand sight but not to be undertaken with an aged maiden aunt in tow.
One other hero must also be remembered. He was Fred Slingsby. Philip 
Wills described him as was the most widely loved man I have known. 'Sling' 
was a wonderful character, full of humour, a man of real enterprise who 
designed and built beautiful and highly successful sailplanes which found 
favour throughout the world. During the First World War he had been awarded 
the Military Medal for a remarkable feat. The pilot of his aircraft had been fatally 
injured by anti-aircraft fire and Fred climbed from his observer/gunner's 
position over the fuselage and successfully flew the machine back to his base 
sitting on the body of his pilot. After the war 'Sling' returned to coffin and 
furniture making in Scarborough and when the gliding bug bit him in the early 
1930s, he designed and built his first machine. At the same time, to help keep 
the many visitors to the town entertained, he built a fleet of assorted wooden 
warships which re-enacted famous sea battles. Each ship was propelled by a 
man sitting inside it, pedalling like mad to turn the underwater screw and from 
time to time also fired a gun at the hapless enemy who always lost. When 
asked about the glider factory his answer was "I make machines in which 
people can throw themselves over a cliff -time and time again!"
In the nineteen thirties with the help of a public spirited wealthy Yorkshire 
land owner, Major Jack Shaw, he started Slingsby Sailplanes of Kirbymoorside. 
When anyone asked him to explain his design methods, he would say "I whittle 
a piece of wood and when I have done whittling, I build it and fly it." His all, time 
high was the Sky, which in 1952 won the World Gliding Championships in 
Spain with Philip Wills as its pilot, and swept the board with 3rd, 4th, 7th, 9th, 
11th and 13th places as well. I sent him a telegram which read "Well whittled 
with wood, you wonderful wizard" which 'Fluff, his delightful wife, said he much 
appreciated. When you visited the factory to order your new glider, he took you 
to lunch in a scruffy pub in the village of Kirbymoorside. When you went to 
collect your new pride and joy, he treated you to a sumptuous meal at that 
socially OK establishment, The Black Swan in Helmsley, known as the 'Mucky 
Duck', but only if you brought your cheque with you! The Shaw-Slingsby Trust, 
an unsuccessful financial dalliance, not of 'Sling's' making, followed by two 
consecutive take-overs virtually finished off the last British glider manufacturing 
unit and there has been no quantity production in this country since.
Another never to be forgotten hero, although only an adopted Lashamite, 
was Lefty Kurylowicz. A fighter pilot during the war, after being shot down he 
spent thirteen days in an open dinghy drifting ever closer to the coast of France 
and was rescued in the nick of time. He had been awarded Poland's highest 
medal for bravery and remained in the Royal Air Force after the end of the war. 
Some time in the fifties, an injury to his spine which temporarily left him bent 
almost double saw him installed at Headley Court, the RAF Rest and 
Recuperation Centre. One day another patient arrived there called Theo 
McEvoy, later a Vice President of the EGA. Air Chief Marshal Sir Theodore 
McEvoy, when only 23, was two years out of the RAF College Cranwell where

--- PAGE 130 ---
Chapter twenty - More heroes_______________________________139
he had won the Sword of Honour when doctors detected ankylosing 
spondylitis, a progressive, crippling disease of the spine. In spite of the pain 
and disability, he carved out a brilliant career which made him a legend in the 
Air Force. In 1941 when he was given command of RAF Northolt, the home of 
the Polish Fighter Wing, he took every opportunity to lead his pilots into battle. 
Later that year he was shot down over the French coast but was able to nurse 
his Hurricane back before crash landing at Lydd, albeit in the middle of a 
minefield from which he was only rescued the next day. Due to his deformed 
spine which made him walk with a serious stoop, he was sent to Headley Court 
for some well earned rest. The morning Lefty and he met, Lefty had just 
collected a plate of porridge when he came forehead to forehead with Theo 
who was about to do the same. "Please" said Lefty "who is taking the mickey 
out of whom?". With their impish sense of humour, the common love of flying 
and gliding, and Theo's affection for his Polish pilots who had recently invested 
him as a Commander of the Order of Polonia Restituta, they forged an 
instantaneous friendship. In RAFGSA Contests they flew in a two seater 
whenever possible. Lefty tells a story about one flight which was not going to 
plan. "The thermals don't like us, we get lower and lower and things look bad. 
Theo say Land. I say No. He say, Land. I say No. He say I am Air Chief 
Marshal, you only Flight Lieutenant, I say, land. So I say, On ground you big 
boss, me little fish. In air me big boss, you little fish, we go on".
Lefty will always be remembered for the tale concerning his brother who had 
left the Air Force to try his luck in the world outside. When they met Lefty said 
"Hello, Mr. Civilian Kurylowicz". "No Lefty, Now no more Kurylowicz, but Brown". 
"Brown" said Lefty "our father he turn in his grave". "Look, in the Air Force with 
fellow Poles, our name is no problem. Now in civilian life people ask my name 
and when I tell them, they say please spell. So I am fed up and change. Now no 
one will ask how you spell Brown". Three months later Lefty met his brother 
again and said "Hello Mr Brown". "No, not Brown-Smith". "Smith?" asked Lefty. 
His brother said "Lefty, when I say my name is Brown, they say but you have 
Polish accent, what your name before. When I tell them, they ask how you spell. 
Now I am Mr Smith. When they say but you have Polish accent, what was your 
name before, I say Brown and nobody ask silly question".

--- PAGE 131 ---
140
A Glider Pilot Bold...
John Hunt of Everest fame, Derek Piggott, Philip Wills and Ann Welch
/T^u^.
t >l IU 
14 ¥si*r?««fei*!#B3j3. for tar •' 
'
\^ 
Dear Ann Welch loved sending us to Perranporth

--- PAGE 132 ---
Chapter 21
And finally
G
liding is a way of life second to none. Every pilot will describe his flights 
in graphic detail and a talented few including Philip Wills had the ability to 
write quite lyrical books about the sport which are highly recommended. 
Whenever glider pilots meet, of whatever nationality, even in far flung places in 
the world, they invariably find that they have much in common. Although the 
weather conditions they meet and the terrain over which they fly will not be the 
same, the challenge, the sheer joy of soaring high in the sky and the sense of 
achievement after a good flight is very much the same. Even after a fraught flight 
when the famous saying of 'I'd rather be down here looking up there, rather than 
being up there looking down here' is appropriate, moments of apprehension or 
mild fear are soon forgotten and you cannot wait to get airborne again.
The business of finding keen, hard working members to keep the club 
operations going is not a problem as there is happily a constant stream of eager 
early pilots who appreciate that their progress in the sport will be enhanced by 
their efforts and the efforts of others. Finding well qualified mature committee 
members is however an increasing worry as the pressures of earning a living

--- PAGE 133 ---
142 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
become more acute and leave less and less time and energy to devote to the 
complex commercial demands made by the efficient running of a Club.
Philip Wills in Free as a Bird makes much of the need to create a firm 
structure within the Movement in order to ensure success. Writing in the Royal 
Aeronautical Society's Centenary Journal in 1966, Philip Wills wrote "Perhaps 
the next vital question to be answered was whether or no the first band of 
pioneers would find a second wave to carry on the torch. The twenty years 
since the end of the war have provided an affirmative answer. People like..., 
and many others show that there are still challenges sufficiently difficult and 
enticing to attract people of the calibre required...".
Now as the end of the century nears, we must ensure that the third, fourth 
and future waves will be stimulated to the same extent. The triple dangers of 
selfishness, mammonism and personal hedonism which modern life seems to 
encourage in some must be fought and defeated at all costs. At the very time 
when new pupils are not as thick on the ground as formerly, when increasingly 
oppressive legislation is threatened and the scales of the movement may have 
tipped too far in favour of the quest for podium positions against all the others 
who still provide the larger share of a club's income. It is absolutely imperative 
that 'people of the calibre required' are found, nurtured and encouraged to take 
a longer view if our sport we know and love it is to survive.
Nevertheless, the new technology of Global Positioning System 
instruments which detail the height, position and time coupled with the loggers 
which record and store this information to be downloaded and later analysed 
together with highly sophisticated electronic variometers which give the pilot 
detailed information about the very air mass in which he flies has immeasurably 
enhanced high performance gliding. These advances open up even greater 
opportunities to explore new soaring terrain throughout the world but also 
sharpen up competitions to a remarkable extent. They, coupled with the very 
latest development in sailplane design make the future exciting and will keep 
the sport at the forefront of man's endeavour.
Lome Welch's favourite expression was "Don't just stand there, Do 
something!" I am the first to admit that some people did not always agree with 
some of my 'somethings'. Philip Wills in Free as a Bird described me over one 
matter as a Bull in a China Shop. Barbara Carrow claims that "Wally is brilliant 
at pouring oil on troubled waters, and then setting light to it". Justified criticism 
I fully accept. To people making less helpful comments, I say "You do better, 
then come back and I'll listen".
The problems of squaring the circle, this being the family, work and the 
sport, is the ever present balancing trick which glider pilots must learn as early 
as possible. I am ashamed to admit that to date during fifty four years of 
continuous gliding, I have only been on two non-gliding holidays each lasting 
only one week. Such is obsession. Over the many years I have been very 
fortunate to part own some fabulous gliders, flown many hours and miles cross- 
country and broken a few records. As well as competing in numerous

--- PAGE 134 ---
Chapter twenty-One— And finally
143
championships, directing and task setting, I have completed more than 11,000 
tows as a tug pilot. Obsession does bring ample rewards!
An on-going quirk of keen pilots whenever they are travelling, especially by 
train, is that each field as it is passed is carefully analysed for the surface and 
crops, best direction of approach for landing and any obvious obstructions which 
might prove to be a hazard. Also 'Spaghetti Western' films are highly unpopular 
with the gliding fraternity as night shots are so obviously shot during the day using 
a special filter as there are always beautiful cumulus clouds filling in the sky, 
something which the angel in charge of weather never arranges for us at night.
I have been remarkably lucky in my chosen sport. The flying and the wide 
spread of administrative jobs that have come my way have all been hugely 
enjoyable. The certain knowledge that I was able to put back more into the 
sport than I took out gives me satisfaction which will last even in my old age 
when active participation has come to a full stop.
Aeons ago, when I was courting my wife, we went to a cinema to see some 
now long forgotten film. As the climax of the love story was reached, just as the 
hero was about to take the heroine in his arms for their first passionate kiss, I 
am told that I turned to my future bride and said "My God, just look at that sky!". 
For evermore she said "if only I had realised the full significance of that remark, 
I would have got up and run!" I am forever grateful that she didn't.
Is there really enough room for you in there?

--- PAGE 135 ---
Appendix 1
WINGS FOR PRUDENCE
or 'The death of a Snooper' - a melodrama
A sordid tale of love and treachery, first produced at Redhill in 1949
Cast:
Chief Flying Instructor 
Prudence, his daughter 
Prune, the Hero 
Dishforth, the villain
The action takes place in a Chief Flying Instructor's office, all the time.
Scene 1: Morning
Enter CFI and Prudence
CFI: 
Oh Prudence dear, what can we do
This club will drive me crazy
These careless clots have pranged the lot
And left us only Daisy 
PRUE: 
We must keep calm
Unlike that club in Surrey
They've pranged themselves as well you know
So I say 'Not to worry' 
CFI: 
We must quickly raise some money
Otherwise we've had it honey 
PRUE: 
A little course is what we need
Attracting here the Bulldog breed 
CFI: 
A fine idea! I'll now address
An advert to the local press
One other thing is rather fraught
As we've done what we didn't ought
We must continue the evasion
Of accident investigation.

--- PAGE 136 ---
146
A Glider Pilot Bold.
Scene 2: A week later
Enter Prudence. Tidies up 
Noise of ancient motor car 
Enter Prune followed by Dishforth
PRUNE:
PRUE:
Exit Prue 
PRUNE: (aside)
DISHFORTH: 
(aside)
Excuse me miss
Is this
The West Downs Gliding Club?
But yes!
And now I'd rather
You waited here while I get father
If it takes me half my life
That lovely girl must be my wife
The best technique with this young flower
Is a low approach and bags of power
Enter CFI and Prudence.
CFI: 
Good morning Chaps
You want to try to learn to fly
PRUNE: 
Indeed I do
But though I've seen some years in Burma 
I've never yet left terra firma
CFI TO DISH: 
Tell me, my son
Have you ever flown before?
DISHFORTH: 
A mere twelve thousand hours or more 
But every one was in the war 
I've flown through cu-nimbs by the score 
And bailing out is just a bore 
I find this office rather trying 
Let's go out and do some flying
CFI: 
Good! I too find it rather boring 
I'll go out and do some soaring
Exeunt CFI and DISH
PRUNE:
PRUE:
Exit Prue 
PRUNE:
Exit Prune
Prudence - excuse my hasty action
But I love you to distraction
I can take you from all this
Off to endless nuptial bliss
Darling do not think me mad
Tell me - Can I ask your Dad?
Marry you!
You've not a hope
You haven't yet gone solo dope
If at first you blunder slightly 
Try again, but more politely

--- PAGE 137 ---
Appendix One
147
Scene 3: Later that day
Enter CFI and Dish
CFI:
DISH:
CFI:
DISH:
CFI:
DISH: 
CFI:
Exit CFI 
DISH:
PRUNE:
DISH:
Good show; I'm glad to say
I think you're doing nicely
Tomorrow morn you start at dawn
That's five o'clock precisely
Am I shortly to be sent on an unaccompanied ascent?
You can do a solo flight Tomorrow if the wind is right
What's the betting that it ceases
But what on earth are all these pieces?
Jimmy here got in a spin
Less a rather vital pin
Little Francis ever proud
Passed on in a thunder cloud
Harry had five grand at Dover
This seat alone got safely over
That is only half the story
Of our club's undoubted glory
But widespread consternation
And ministerial measures
Would follow publication
Of our destructive pleasures
Not a whisper will I utter
Not a mention, not a mutter
To such an upright man as you
I would gladly give my Pru
What a simple little man
Never to suspect my plan
Of persons I am no respecter
Of accidents I'm Chief Inspector
(enter PRUNE unseen)
You villain Sir! You wretched cad!
You'll part a damsel from her Dad
If the Minister hears this tale
The CFI will go to gaol
Disguising an official
I'll not hesitate to say
For processes judicial
Is not the British way
Was not the British way
You can save the whole position
If you'll accept my one condition
That it's clearly understood

--- PAGE 138 ---
148
A Glider Pilot Bold.
PRUNE:
DISH:
(Exit laughing) 
PRUNE:
You abandon Prue for good 
The prang rate I have found 
Can be quietly scrubbed around 
I must perforce agree 
To your infernal plot 
For she'll never marry me 
If her Father's on the spot 
Good show! I must now depart 
You've saved the girl a broken heart
I can quickly turn the tables 
And fix this wretched traitor 
By filing through the cables of Daisy's elevator 
(Exit. Filing noises off)

--- PAGE 139 ---
Appendix One
Scene 4: The next morning
Enter CFI, PRUNE and DISHFORTH
CFI: 
All ready Chaps,
We must press on this morning
And though the weather's Q B.I
I see no reason not to fly
If Uxbridge gets no warning
For todays' inaugural flight
You, DISHFORTH, must get ready
This binding fog obscures the sight 
(Prompter blows chalk onto stage)
So take it fairly steady
The D. I ing of Daisy is something I should do
But as you're going to fly her
I leave it all to you
The usual structural defects
You had better overlook
Just twang the wires and bang the tyres
And sign up in the book 
Exeunt 
ALL: 
Take up slack ... all out. (Offstage)
Look out he's going to crash 
(Sounds of launching and crash off-stage) 
Enter PRUNE 
PRUNE: 
Stupid DISHFORTH never feared
That his wires were panacea'd
He would not have come a cropper
Had he done his D I proper 
CFI: 
That DISHFORTH was a bounder
He deserves to burn in Hell
In a furnace stoked with plywood
From a primary's nacelle
Young fellow your devotion
Has been constant brave and true
And so I give permission
For you to woo my PRUE.
And now complete destruction
Of this damned abomination
Leaves me in peace to measure
In metres feet and inches
The complicated stresses
Of automatic winches 
Exit CFI 
Enter PRUE

--- PAGE 140 ---
150 
A Glider Pilot Bold..
PRUE: 
In this situation parlous
Darling you've been simply marvellous 
Dirty DISHFORTH pranged and dead 
Now we can truly wed
PRUNE: 
Quickly, fill your suitcase 
With all essential junk 
And forthwith go and park it 
In the Club's best bridal bunk 
For tedious wedding details 
We have no time to wait 
In the Club's new whitewashed workshop 
We have an urgent date 
The timely death of DISHFORTH 
Has saved you boundless shame 
Now reconstructing Daisy 
Is our most pressing aim 
Exeunt
The End

--- PAGE 141 ---
Appendix 2
I 
would love to have had the time, energy and above the skill to have written 
full Biographies - or at least extended articles - about some of my gliding 
heroes and the fascinating people I was lucky to have known. Hopefully 
someone else will rise to the challenge so that the lives of remarkable men and 
women are not lost to history. Over the years I have collected a few lesser well 
known and obscure facts and will be delighted to make then available to any 
prospective biographer.
Nevertheless their stories must be told and to prime the pump, herewith are 
just a few.
Fred Slingsby, Yorkshire genius glider designer and builder
Born in 1894, he served in the Royal Flying Corps, later renamed The Royal Air 
Force, from 1914 to 1920 during which he flew as an Observer/Air Gunner. On one 
sortie over enemy lines, his pilot was killed and Fred climbed out of his gun position 
along the fuselage and sitting on his dead pilot's body successfully flew the 
aeroplane back across our lines. He was awarded the Military Medal for this feat.
When he left the service in 1920, be bought a partnership in a woodworking 
and furniture factory. When sales slowed, he kept the workshop busy making 
coffins and anything else that came his way. In 1927 George Horrocks, 
Scarborough's entertainment manager conceived a brilliant use of the lake in 
Peasholm Park, re-enacting famous naval battles with superb very large 
models of various warships. The twice weekly shows provided Fred Slingsby 
with some steady trade as - in his words "the silly beggars keep crashing into 
one another". This entertainment is still going strong some ninety years later!
1930 was the year that gliding took hold in Yorkshire when Fred and some 
friends formed the Scarborough Gliding Club. In no time the club flourish, 
employed the German ace Mr Magersuppe as their Instructor and invited Herr 
Kronfeld to visit and demonstrate his soaring technique. 'Sling' was soon 
involved in repairing their primary glider which made frequent trips to his 
workshop. As a member of the Committee he was called The Ground 
Engineer'. In the club notes published in the December 1930 issue of 
'Sailplane and Glider the following appeared " Mr.Slingsby earned distinction 
by 'soaring' without a machine at all, the launching medium consisting of a 
somewhat irate bull which chased him 'upwind' and over a five foot hedge".
The December issue club notes read "Slingsby introduced a novel feature 
in the shape of a short deep-bellied 'bream-like' nacelle top our Zogling which 
enclosed the pilot. It is hoped that the improved streamlining will give higher 
performance, perhaps soaring in strong winds'.
In September 1931 Magersuppe and Fred established a new British Two- 
seater Distance Record - a straight line of six miles during which they reached a

--- PAGE 142 ---
152 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
maximum height of 300 feet. Those were the days! That year he was able to move 
into one of the very large disused Scarborough tram-sheds located off Scalby 
Road. At the time he also had a furniture shop at 20 Queen Street in the town.
The history of Fred, his gliders, his major contribution to the British gliding 
movement and the Kirbymoorside factory have been excellently recorded by 
Martin Simons in his book 'Slingsby Sailplanes' (Airlife Publishing Ltd, 1996) but 
regretfully to date no one has written a detailed biography of the man himself.
Fred was very much his own man and did not take kindly to some highly 
educated gliding people who thought they knew more than him. One of these, 
having collected his shiny new Skylark 3 sent a letter to Sling asking the factory 
in future to collect all the loose bits and pieces left in the wings and fuselage 
and provide them in a separate bag. In answer to the designing advice which 
certain well known gliding 'pundits' relentlessly offered, 'Slings' answer was 
always "I get a sharp knife and a bit of wood and I whittle. When I like the look 
of what I've done, I put the bits together and fly them.
When in 1952 Philip Wills won the World Gliding Championships flying a 
Slingsby glider, I sent Fred a telegram which read "Well whittled with wood you 
wonderful wizard". He loved it. Both Rika Harwood and I tried hard to persuade 
him to write about his life but his answer was always "I'm a simple lad, no one 
would be interested. How wrong he was.
John Stanley Sproule (Lt.Cdr RN retd.)
At various times called 'Stanley Sproule', 'Sprout' by Joan (Meakin) Price and 
Naomi Heron-Maxwell, 'Sprocket' by others... John Sproule was a remarkable 
Inventor and aviator whose life and activities fully deserves a major biography.
I often asked him to write his autobiography and after a lot of nagging he 
did start using a tape machine and filled a number of spools before, very 
tragically, being run over and killed near his house in Shoreham, Sussex.
Apart from his well-known feat such as the most unique launch ever being 
towed behind HMS Pretoria Castle, an aircraft carrier in a Slingsby T.20 to 
check the eddies and turbulences created by the flat top. John wrote later"... 
I was airborne about 300 feet over the waters of the Irish Sea... it struck me 
the time that this was a very funny place to be flying a glider...". The account 
is fully described and illustrated in Martin Simons' book 'Slingsby Sailplanes), 
and although the 'Sproule net' used to save lives by literally fishing the person 
out of the sea is certainly his most famous invention, his Harpoon System 
where the helicopter could fire a harpoon into a grid on the helicopter pad and 
lock itself securely on to the deck of the ship is still in use to-day. Many, many 
other diverse inventions followed.
The Press coverage of the world glider two-seater duration record of 22 
hours 13 minutes and 35 seconds which Bill Murray and John established on 
the 11th July 1938 produced seventy five feet of press cuttings from the ninety 
world wide newspapers who reported on the flight and make fascinating

--- PAGE 143 ---
Appendix Two________________________________ 
_____153
reading, surely a publicity record which no other gliding flight has ever achieved. 
Sproule recorded "After landing one little incident was very interesting. Amy 
Johnson was a habitue' of the London Gliding Club and after this epic flight with 
newspaper people all over the place, she took me aside one moment and said 
"are you getting any money for all this business?". I said "no, I've never thought 
of it". So she said "leave me it me. I'll see whether I can squeeze some money 
out of some of these blighters, they've got a lot more money than you or I have 
and I learnt the hard way when I was doing my record flying".
As a result I got an exclusive interview with the Daily Mail who coughed up 
sixty quid which to me was a fortune in those days. On the strength of this I 
opened a bank account. So that was dear Amy Johnson, she was such a nice 
person, she liked being at the gliding club because people left her alone and 
didn't pester her and treated her just like anybody else".
Some of the press cuttings are hilarious and must be preserved. Here are just 
some:
News Chronicle
"For the first half-hour there can be few sensations more thrilling than 
gliding through the air on the wings of the wind, but after twenty-two 
hours even gliding must lose its attraction.
The record-breaking flight of Murray and Sproule was an astonishing 
display of grit and skill. It seems almost incredible that two men could 
remain in the air, without any motive power, almost the whole round of 
the clock. Such a performance demands remarkable cleverness in 
using stray gusts of wind and currents of air. For that reason gliding is 
more than a sport, it is fine training in aviation".
News of the World
"... the pilots took with them a pint of hot coffee, a quart of water, 
sandwiches, chocolates and fruit. They also had a few books to read. 
After they had been in the air for fourteen and a half hours, Flight 
Lieutenant R.H. Shaw of the RAF (flying Ann Edmonds/Douglas/Welch 
Grunau Baby) tried to drop them a fresh supply of sandwiches from a 
single seater glider. The 'rations' dangled temptingly from the end of a 
thin cord and the manoeuvre was nearly successful, but the cord 
slipped from the record-breakers fingers and the sandwiches fell among 
spectators below...".
Sunday Express - banner headline - 
"Two Men in Glider Smash Records
Waterlogged in mid-air over Dunstable Downs - but on they go - One 
Man III, Out Of Food - (the text reads_ - Angle-deep in water, cramped, 
numb with cold, half kneeling, half standing in their tiny cockpit, two men 
were early today creating a new world's gliding record for Britain...".

--- PAGE 144 ---
154 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
Evening News - Headline -
"GLIDING IS ON THE "UP AND UP"
It is a fascinating and clever sport. (Text read) -".. .when a director of an 
old-established City firm - a man shrewd in business and outwardly 
normal in all other respects - suddenly plonks down nearly £600 for an 
imported sailplane, spends every spare moment sitting on upward 
currents off a hillside, and going round in tiny circles, like a goldfish in its 
bowl, his friends are left with but two explanations of his conduct. Either 
there is something radically wrong with poor So-and-So, or there must be 
something oddly fascinating about this new soaring-flight business...".
Observer - Headline -
"JULES VERNE ECLIPSED".
The article ends " ...for twenty-two hours, in spite of every physical 
discomfort, they remained aloft, airborne by the invisible air currents 
alone. For twenty-two hours they stole their secrets from the birds. One 
day, possibly, Puck may have to yield his crown of speed to the roaring 
that a plane without an engine could keep two men aloft for nearly a day, 
but that is what happened...".
What is highly amusing is that the provincial newspapers claimed our heroes
as their own. Thus -
Leeds Mercury - Headline
" World Gliding Record won for Britain. York interest in record. (Slingsby 
of Kirbymoorside built the Falcon).
Glasgow Herald - Headline -
"Scots RAF Officer's part in difficult feat".
Scotsman - Headline - 'Scots pilot's world gliding record'.
Brighton Argus - Headline -
'Sussex man and Scottish pilot...' (Sproule's parents had move to Sussex).
Tyrone Constitution - Headline - 
Tyrone's man's wonderful feat'
(Text reads) - "Stanley Sproule, son of Mr. and Mrs. John Sproule, formerly 
of Mulvin, Co.Tyrone completed a new world record which has been 
received with wonderful enthusiasm throughout his native County of 
Tyrone, just as it has caused amazement throughout the world. The intrepid 
young Tyrone airman has been the recipient of thousands of messages of 
congratulations from the farthest part of the world, and in upholding the 
honour of Co Tyrone and Ulster is deserving of special recognition.
Beds and Herts Evening Telegraph - Headline -
Luton man's part in record flight" (Sproule lived in Luton).

--- PAGE 145 ---
Appendix Two________________________________________155
Yorkshire Evening Press - Headline -
"Boyhood dream comes true - Peterite breaks glider endurance record 
- Yorkshire built machine" - (Text reads) - "I have never known a case 
of youthful inclination being better carried out after leaving school" said 
Mr. A.W.Ping, the Headmaster of the Preparatory School at St. Peter's 
School, York, to-day. He was referring to Mr. J. Stanley Sproule.
Universe - Headline -
'Breaks gliding record, has mass said!'.
Catholic Herald - Headline -
'Without an engine'. (Text reads) - "It was in his last year at Ampleforth 
that Flight Lieut Murray first saw a glider when a club was started on the 
heights of Sutton Bank just six miles from the school. He went to 
Cranwell in 1931, where he managed to keep up his interest in gliding in 
spite of the fact that even as a short time ago as that RAF people were 
inclined to look down on them who flew airplanes without engines...".
Then there was his revival of interest in Sir George Cayley, the father of flying in the 
18th century. He built an exact model of Cayley's early design and then supervised 
the building of a true replica by Ken Fripp of Southdown Aero Services at Lasham 
which Derek Piggott flew in the very vale in Yorkshire where it all started.
A full account of John Sproule's aviation activities is so full of interest; I do 
hope that one day soon someone will write a full biographer of this genius. His 
tales of his apprenticeship at Vickers are at times hilarious and possibly even 
libellous. While working at Slingsby Sailplanes in 1936, he designed the Cadet 
of which 431 were built and proved to be a great boon for the British Gliding 
Clubs. His Navy career - seconded for a time to the RAF to teach future 
military glider pilots, then to teach the Canadians and Americans before 
returning to the UK to lead the development, fuller and more diverse use of 
Naval Helicopters should be recorded.
One invention which would benefit mankind if only we could persuade a 
large company to put it on the market is the 'Sproule oh-so-obvious coat 
hanger'. John's reasoning was simple. When a man undresses, he takes off his 
jacket, hangs it on his coat hanger. Then off with the trousers, take the jacket off 
the hanger, hold it or put it on to bed/chair/floor and carefully fold the trousers 
and hang them on to the you-know-what. Now the jacket is put back where it 
started at the beginning of the cycle.
"All we do"" said John "build a 
coat hanger where the trousers 
slide on to a horizontal arm which 
can be done without disturbing the 
coat. The device is hinged so that it 
can be packed flat to reduce the 
amount of space required.

--- PAGE 146 ---
156 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
HCN (aka Nick) Goodhart
(Rear Admiral RN, C.B., FRAeS retd).
Certainly one of the most remarkable English glider pilots is surely Nick 
Goodhart. Educated at the Royal Naval College Dartmouth and the Royal 
Naval Engineering College, Keyham, Devonport. He writes "In December 1940 
I emerged from Keyham dressed as a Lieutenant (E) with much book-learning 
but no experience in handling men. The next three years were eventful to say 
the least, his ship being hit by two 1000 Ib bombs during the evacuation from 
Crete and making a slow return to Alexandria with a huge hole in the starboard 
side forward just above the waterline. He was given the job of organising the 
repair with a temporary patch. Being Nick it was good enough for the ship to 
be sailed through the Suez Canal, round Africa to Norfolk Virginia where the 
US Navy Dockyard carried out a permanent repair.
Posted to another ship he was soon back in the Mediterranean but in January 
1944 sailed to Canada for pilot training. In April 1945 while serving on aircraft 
carriers serving in the Indian Ocean, on one operation the engine of his Hellcat 
gave up the ghost and Nick had to ditch in the Malacca Straits. Happily he was 
soon picked up by a destroyer and passed back to the carrier by jackstay.
The next highlight was in January 1946 when he joined No.4 course of the 
Empire Test Pilot's School, then at Cranfield with only 424 hours flying to his 
credit. Fellow 'pupils' on that course included David Ince and Neville Duke.
Nick's Naval career prospered mightily and he finally retired a Rear 
Admiral in 1973 but not before his invention for which he will always be 
gratefully remembered by all carrier pilots in the world's navies. Landing an 
aircraft onto the deck of a carrier was a hazardous task during which very 
many pilots were lost. The task of lining up between the portside batsman who 
signalled your position with the aid of two large ping pong bats (if the aircraft 
got too close, the poor man had to leap over the side into a large net!) and the 
ship's superstructure on the starboard side. As Nick described it" if you were 
going to land straight on, all you could see in front of you was the large engine 
of the plane. If you looked down to your left, you could just see the chap who 
was guiding you in with those ping pong bats. If you looked to the right, all you 
could see was the ship's funnel.
It meant that when you couldn't see any deck you had got it about right.
In the early '50's he was working in the Ministry of Aviation on the problem 
of matching the carrier deck landing equipment to the rapidly rising deck 
landing speed and weight of the new aircraft in the pipeline. He realised that 
while the batsman system had sufficed successfully in the days of the 
Swordfish, it was already becoming inadequate with the fast jets coming along. 
Clearly the batman must be taken out of the loop. This led him the idea of the 
'Mirror Deck Landing Sight' approach system which proved to be far superior 
to the old bat system. The American Navy was ecstatic and took up his device 
immediately and even awarded him the 'U.S. Legion of Merit'. The British Navy 
followed some time later! Today his system is used by all carriers in the world.

--- PAGE 147 ---
Appendix Two 
______________________________________157
I first met Nick during the 1947 British Nationals held at Bramcote near 
Nuneaton when he was P.2 to John Sproule flying the Naval Kranich. He had 
learnt to glide before the war. When in 1952 I visited Pont St Vincent, the 
Soaring Centre in North East France, the French told with great reverence and 
awe of an Englishman who had arrived there the year before, asked whether 
he could hire a glider but not having any maps he removed the paper in which 
his sandwiches were wrapped, drew a few navigation points and promptly flew 
the 300k goal flight to gain his Gold C (No.9). His gliding 'CV is mind blowing!
British Nationals 
World Championships
1947 Bramcote 
in Navy Team 
1956 France 
Gold, 2 Seater
Champion
1950Camphill 
Silver, 2nd 
1957 Poland 
Silver (Single
sealer)
1951 Camphill 
Silver, 2nd 
1960 Germany 
4th
1957Lasham 
Silver, 2nd 
1963 Argentina 
11th
1959Lasham 
Silver, 2nd 
1965 England 
7th
1962 Lasham 
Gold, National Champion 
1968 Poland 
16th
1967Lasham 
Gold, National Champion 
1972 Yugoslavia 
4th
1969 Lasham 
Silver, 2nd
1971 Lasham 
Gold, National Standard 
Class Champion.
In 1955 while serving as Staff Air Engineer Officer and Staff Pilot, British Joint 
Services Mission, Washington D.C. he competed in and won the American 
National Championship. As a foreigner he could not be declared the winner but 
was scored 'above the Champion'.
His most remarkable flight was in his Slingsby Skylark 3 on 10th May during 
the 1959 National Champs at Lasham. On his second re-light at 1303hrs (in 
those happy far off days, you were allowed two relights after landings back on 
the site or after an out-landing) he used thermals, thunderstorms and standing 
waves to reach Portmoak, the glorious home of the Scottish Gliding Union. 
That flight set the new British National Goal Flight record of 579.36km. The 
United Kingdom records (for flights starting in the UK) - 500km Goal Flight, 
Single-seater Distance and the 500km speed 58.8mph. He had previously set 
a new British Absolute Height record, climbing to 37,500 feet in wave behind 
Mount Whitney in the Sierra Nevada, USA.
Nick did the aerodynamic design and led the team which built Sigma, the 
futuristic advanced sailplane. Variable geometry wings were a major feature. 
Problems arising from the liquidation of Slingsby Sailplanes Ltd where it was 
being built were overcome and construction continued in a hangar at Heathrow 
Airport. It flew successfully and carried out a research programme for the MOD. 
It was eventually passed to professor of Aeronautics at McGill University, 
Canada; he just happened to be a glider pilot and used it for further aerodynamic 
research. It continues to fly.

--- PAGE 148 ---
158
A Glider Pilot Bold...
Yet another of his aeronautical 'firsts' was the design and building of a twin- 
engined man powered aircraft with a span of 42 metres. It required two fit 
young pilots to fly it. He built it in a large hangar at Greenham Common and 
carried out some short hops. Unfortunately while standing on a ladder adjusting 
some cables, he fell on to the fragile machine causing considerable damage. 
At the same time the American Air Force acquired the airfield to keep their cold- 
war nuclear weapons there and without hangar and runway it was impractical 
to continue the development of the 'Newbury Manflier'. It had a sad end when 
at the Science Museum someone started a nearby hovercraft and Nick's pride 
and joy was reduced to a bag of firewood.
His expertise in the aviation field was always in great demand. He has a 
remarkable brain which he uses to great effect. I well remember a meeting when 
we, together with Philip Wills, the then Chairman of the British Gliding Association, 
David Carrow the Chairman of the Lasham Gliding Society and our two MP 
supporters Colonel Freddie Gough MP and Joan Quennell MP were confronted 
by Julian Amery, the then Minister of Aviation and various of his Civil Servants 
produced argument after argument against Lasham's cause to be granted a lease 
which Nick was able to demolish by proving the fallacy of their carefully prepared 
papers. Julian Amery later said that he found dealing with Archbishop Makarios of 
Cyprus was easier than dealing with those clever... Glider pilots!
He was a member of the British Gliding Association Council for many years 
and served as the Chairman of the Airspace Committee. One of the few people 
in Britain who fully understood the future problems of the probable growth in air 
traffic, he championed the building of a new major airport off the Essex Coast 
as counter to the long term unsuitability of Heathrow London Airport.
He is a master of many parts. He was the sixth Goodhart to be elected 
Master of the Grocers Company of the City of London, the first his Great 
Grandfather in 1820. In 1951 with a Dorothy Stanley-Turner, girl racing driver he
knew, they competed in 
the Monte Carlo Rally 
driving an Alvis to finish 
35th out of 350. In 2004 
this strapping lad of 85 
abseiled down the 120 foot 
high tower of Cullompton 
Parish Church to raise 
over £4200 for the Exeter 
Hospiscare. 
An 
active 
member of Lloyds, at the 
time of writing he is busy 
developing 
his 
latest 
invention - a gigantic anti- 
hurricane monster device. 
Quite a man!

--- PAGE 149 ---
Appendix Two
159
(Alan) Derek Piggott
Although however hard I tried, no one would publish his full CV but it is so 
unique, mind blowing and inspiring, probably never to be equalled, here it is
1922 
Born 27th December 1922
1928-9 
As a boy of five, made a first passenger flight in an AVRO 504 at 
Eastbourne.
1935-42 
Active aeromodeller and aircraft enthusiast. Flew rubber driven 
duration models in National and Club competitions with 
considerable success.
1942 
Entered the RAF for pilot training. First solo in DH 82a Tiger Moth. 
Elementary Flying Training School on Fairchild PT26a Cornell in 
Canada. Service Flying Training School on Airspeed Oxfords.
1943 
Awarded "Wings" and Commissioned as Pilot Officer. Completed 
an Elementary and a Twin-engine Instructor Course. Returned to 
U.K. a C Category instructor. Converted to Troop Carrying Gliders 
(Hotspurs, Hadrians and Horsa gliders) and moved to India. 
Instructed Squadron pilots on D.H.82a Tiger Moths.
1945 
Supply dropping on the Assam and Burma fronts on 267 
Squadron DCS Dakotas. Glider Squadron disbanded.
1946 
Instructing at the Indian Air Force Elementary Flying Training School 
at Jodhpur on PT26a Cornells. B2 Instructor Rating. Conversion to 
Beechcraft Expeditor and ferry flight from India to England.
1947 
VIP pilot for the Governor of Lahore on the Headquarters' 
Communication Squadron at Delhi, flying AVRO 19, DCS Dakota 
and AT6 Harvard. Anti-riot patrols and liaison low flying with the 
army during the pre-partition riots flying Auster V, Harvard and 
Anson. Returned to U.K. in DCS Dakota (P2)
1948 
Flying instructor at the Service Training School at Ternhill. (AT6 
Harvards)
1948-51 
Staff instructor at the Central Flying School training instructors. 
Instructed on all types of single and twin engine training aircraft 
including Meteor Jets.
Detachments to HMS. aircraft carrier Illustrious to watch initial 
deck landings and to the Home Command Gliding Instructors 
School (HCGIS) at Detling, Kent to give lectures and flying 
instruction to ATC Gliding School instructors.
Member of the winning British Team for the Wakefield 
International Flying Model Aircraft Trophy in Akron, Ohio.

--- PAGE 150 ---
160 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
1951 
Awarded the RAF CFSA1 (highest) Flying Instructor Category. 
Chief Instructor of the Home Command Gliding Instructor School 
(HCGIS) at Detling, training instructors for the ATC/CCF Gliding 
Schools in Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Introduced improved methods of dual instruction for gliders and 
wrote the Home Command Gliding Publication, HCP110b 
Instructors Handbook, for distribution to the 50 ATC gliding schools. 
Devised and wrote notes for the training scheme for schools using 
primary gliders. Trained the school masters to operate and supervise 
cadet training on the primary gliders. Test flew and modified the 
prototype Slingsby T38 Grasshopper primary glider for school use.
Carried out inspections of many of the 50 ATC gliding schools 
during each winter.
Flew and instructed on all ATC types, T21b Sedburgh, Cadet Mk 
1, 2, 3, Eon Eton (SG38) and Slingsby T38 Grasshopper.
Investigated a fatal gliding accident where a glider on a first solo 
dived vertically into the ground following a normal winch launch. 
No conclusions were possible at the time but subsequently I 
investigated similar incidents and established that Sub-Gravity 
Sensations were the cause of many of this kind of accident.
Lectured to the OSTIV Technical Meeting in France on these 
accidents and distributed my booklet "Sub-Gravity Sensations 
and Gliding Accidents" to most countries World wide.
Set the British two sealer glider height record in a thunderstorm 
during the championships. (Flying with an ATC cadet to over 
17,000 feet in an open cockpit T21b Sedburgh).
1953 
Queen's Commendation for work on developing and introducing 
new instructional techniques for ATC gliding.
Left the RAF as a Flight Lieutenant to become the Chief Flying 
Instructor of the Lasham Gliding Centre, near Alton, Hants.
1955 
Set a new British single seat glider height record of over 25,000 
feet in a thunderstorm flying a Skylark 2.
1959 
Took part in the Daily Mail Bleriot Anniversary Air Race from 
London to Paris. Flew a Eon SG38 Eton Primary glider 
aerotowed from Blackbushe to Beynes (On the outskirts of Paris) 
and return. Made a further flight in an OJympia 419 to Deal, glided 
across the Channel and then soared the 160 miles to Beynes. 
Awarded a consolation prize by Flight International Magazine.
1961 
Winner of the British Glider Aerobatic Championships flying an 
Olympia 403, at the London Gliding Club, Dunstable.
Awarded the Royal Aero Club Bronze Medal for services to gliding.

--- PAGE 151 ---
Appendix Two_________________________________________161
Test pilot for the Southampton University Man Powered Aircraft, 
SUMPA. Made the first authenticated unaided take off and 
sustained flight in the world at Lasham airfield on the 9th 
November 1961. Recognised by the Royal Aeronautical Society.
1962 
British representative at the International OSTIV Gliding 
Instructor's Conference, Varese, Italy. Attended the four week 
OSTIV International Instructors Meeting at Varese, Italy. 
Discussed all aspects of gliding instruction and training with senior 
representatives of eight European countries. Took part in the test 
flying and evaluating glider handling course run by Hans Zacher. 
From this experience, I recognised the future role for motor gliders 
for basic training of glider pilots. Visited and flew at Aosta.
Parachuted to safety from a Polish Bocian two seater glider in 
emergency following damage to the tailplane. Awarded the In/in 
Caterpillar badge.
Resigned as Chief Flying Instructor at Lasham in order to specialise 
as a Film Stunt pilot.
Film pilot and technical adviser. Flew most of the aircraft in all the 
films. Notable for flying the Fokker DR1 Tri-plane replicas in the 
bridge scene in the Blue Max flying 17 times through the narrow 
arch. Made a deliberate crash in a modified Tiger Moth for a 
scene in Villa Rides. 
Feature films included:-
Those Magnificent Men and Their Flying Machines
The Blue Max
Darling Lili
Chitty, Chitty Bang Bang
Guns in the Heather
Villa Rides
You Can't Win Them All
The Red Baron
Slipstream
1964-5 
Work experience carrying out Certificate of Airworthiness 
Inspections and repairs on wood structures and fabric covered 
gliders during the Winter months.
Returned to Lasham as Chief Flying Instructor. Introduced the 
use of Motor Gliders for basic and advanced training with a 
modified syllabus for teaching glider pilots.
Parascending experience on first Lemoine parachute to be flown 
in the UK and later with National Air Scout Centre at Lasham.

--- PAGE 152 ---
162 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
1971 
Winner of the Lasham Regional Gliding Championships.
1972 
Flew the replica of Sir George Cayley's 1852 glider for the Anglia 
Television film about the life and work of Sir George.
1980 
Six months Motor Glider training study for the FAA and SSA at 
Caddo Mills.Texas, USA Trained 21 ab initio students on a 
Scheibe SF25e, Super Falke and Fournier RF 5B Sperber and 
soloing them on Schweizer 2-33 gliders on aerotow. These trials 
led to motor gliders being accepted by the FAA for use in the USA
Invited to go to Holland to talk about the uses of the motor gliders 
for training glider pilots. The lecture was attended by a number 
of their airworthiness department who were not in favour of 
accepting them. By explaining the very poor handling 
characteristics were the norm on gliders of that period and that 
most experienced pilots testing these aircraft were appalled by 
the adverse yaw, I convinced them that they were very safe 
aircraft in the hands of glider pilots. Shortly after my visit they 
were approved for use in Holland.
1984 
Toured the gliding clubs in the Southern States of Australia for 
five weeks, sponsored by the Rothman's Sports Foundation. (Six 
days in each State) Visited and lectured and flew with instructors 
and club members at all the accessible gliding sites. (23 lecture 
sessions totalling over 65 hours).
1986 
Awarded Royal Aero Club Diploma for services to gliding.
1987 
Awarded the MBE for services to gliding.
1988 
Retired from Lasham after 30 years as CFI. Continued as an 
active Gliding Instructor and competitor.
Attended the Gliding Federation of Australia Centenary Soaring 
Convention in Sydney as guest lecturer, and visited gliding sites 
in several Southern States, flying and lecturing.
1989-94 
Active 3-axis Microlight aircraft instructor, instructing and 
demonstrating theA.M.F.Chevron type.
1991 & 97 
Winner of the Lasham Regional Gliding Championships
2005 
Competing in a Lasham Regional Competition in 2005, flew 504 
kms. in a 12.6 metre span ME7 AC5 Russian glider, 
acknowledged as an outstanding flight by an over 80 year old 
pilot in such a low performance glider.
Flew in the U.S. Seniors' National Championships at Seminole 
Lake, Florida in 2004 and 2007.
Continuing as an active Gliding Competitor in two seat gliders, 
but ceased instructing and solo competition flying because of 
Insurance difficulties. Discontinued PPL Licence.

--- PAGE 153 ---
Appendix Two_________________________________________163
2007 
Awarded Royal Aero Club Gold medal and was appointed an 
honorary Companion of the Royal Aeronautical Society.
2008 
Awarded FAI Lilienthal Medal
Other Experience during the past 50 years
Flown and instructed in Scotland, Southern Ireland, Northern Ireland, 
France, Italy, Spain, East and West Germany, Holland, Australia, U.S.A, India, 
Assam.
Gave lectures and instructional flights at 36 UK gliding clubs.
Lectured on gliding instructional techniques and safety at ten Annual SSA 
Soaring Conventions and took part in their FAA/SSA Instructor Revalidation 
Clinics as a guest lecture
Ran weekend and week long Instructor training and refresher seminars at 
more than twelve gliding schools and clubs all over the USA with visits to more 
than twenty other gliding sites giving lectures and instruction.
Official visit to the US Air Force Academy at Colorado Springs for seven 
days giving lectures and flying with their Cadet Instructors. Recommended 
motor glider training as a means of increasing capacity of glider training.
Toured some French gliding centres including Fayence and Chateauroux.
Tour of some German gliding sites and manufacturers including Scheibe, 
GROB and Schleichers discussing instruction, safety and glider designs.
Gave presentations at OSTIV Conferences in Amsterdam, Terlet, Lasham 
and Chateauroux.
Guest pilot at the evaluation of the entries for the World Class glider at 
Oerlinghausen to give an opinion on the types as potential club gliders.
Member of the International Jury for the first Junior FAI International Gliding 
Championships at Terlet, Holland.
Twice invited to be the lecturer and demonstrator at the young persons 
Science series of weekends at Brighton University on aerodynamics, gliding 
and flying. (Similar in format to the Royal Institute Christmas lectures on TV)
Annual lecture on flying gliders and WW1 aircraft to Course members of the 
Empire Test Pilots School at Boscombe Down. (5 years)
Over a period of 6 years organised and flew on day gliding courses for 16-18 
year old school students. Over a thousand boys and girls attended these mid- 
week courses at Lasham. They were organised with the aim of giving them the 
responsibilities and experience of working as a team and carrying out all the 
necessary ground duties expected of club members. They were all given two car 
or winch launches in two seaters and learned the basics of flying a glider. A few 
longer courses were also run for students wishing to qualify for the Duke of 
Edinburgh Awards. These courses were supported by Berkshire and Hampshire 
County Councils and considered a very successful project.

--- PAGE 154 ---
164 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
He had no formal aeronautical qualifications but many years practical 
experience of glider development, repairs and test flying.
Designed, supervised the construction and test flew six reduced scale SE5a 
World War 1 fighter replicas at Slingsby Sailplanes Ltd. built for the film Darling 
Lilli. Supervised the building and testing of a Sopwith Camel and German Rumpler 
aircraft for film use together with a number of non-flying mock up aircraft.
Member of the EGA No1 Test Group involved in the testing, evaluation and 
acceptance tests of foreign gliders being introduced into the UK
Experience at testing and developing many British prototype gliders from 
1953 to 2000, including the Slingsby T49C motor glider, T53, Vega, Kestrel 22, 
HP14 and the Birmingham Guild BG100 & 135 and Torva gliders.
Production testing of the Elliotts of Newbury Olympia 2b and 463 series gliders.
Recommended to the BGA a number of safety modifications to gliders, to 
reduce forces required to close airbrakes on the K7, and Pirat. Introduced the 
so called "Piggott hook", fitted to all later types of DG gliders to prevent 
inadvertent opening of airbrakes, a frequent cause of launching incidents and 
accidents over the past 50 years.
Extensive experience of Bungee launching sites along the South Downs 
and of hill soaring in low speed gliders.
International Gold C award with three diamonds. (Silver C No. 324 15/6/51, 
Gold Badge No.30 6/5/57) Diamond Distance 3/9/80, Goal 3/6/59, Height 
14/7/55, BGANo.110, FAI No.2836
Regular competitor in the British National Championships from 1952 -1963 
and Regional Competitions 1964 to 2007.
RAF Master Gliding Instructor's Rating.
British Gliding Association Chief Instructor Rating 1954 to 1988 and BGA 
Full Rating 1988-2007.
CAA Full Motor Gliding Instructor Rating from 1968-2006.
Private Pilot's License. Ex-examiner for Motor Glider licenses. Previously 
held the GAPAN Instructor Rating for light aircraft, BMAA Group D Microlight 
Instructor Rating 1989-1994.
Held FAA (USA) Commercial, Instructor and Instrument Ratings for single 
engine power and gliders.
Active consultant and Expert Witness on Gliding, Ballooning, Parachuting, 
Paragliding and Light Aircraft accidents.

--- PAGE 155 ---
Appendix Two______ 
_______________165
Gliding Instructional Experience
1951-53 
ATC Instructor's School: 3400 winch launches and 430 hours 
including instructing on bungee launched Primary gliders and on 
T31 Cadet Mk.3 and T21b Sedburgh gliders.
1954-2007 
Approximately 17,000 launches and over 5000 hours in over 180 
different types of glider, mainly instructional car and winch 
launches. Over 2000 hours flying and instructing on motor 
gliders. (27 types) Continued instructing at Lasham and flying 
several Regional competitions each year until 2007.
Power Flying Experience
Approximately 4000 hours on over 149 different types of powered aircraft 
ranging from four engine bombers and Meteor jets to ultra-light aircraft. 
Over 250 hours instructing on Group D, 3 axis microlight aircraft.
Author
Author of the following books and publications:
GLIDING,
A hand book of soaring flight 
1958
1st edition
Completely re-written for 5th Edition 
now 7th edition, 
but same title
BEGINNING GLIDING 
1975 
now 3rd edition 
UNDERSTANDING GLIDING 
1977 
now 3rd edition 
DELTA PAPA, 
1977 
a life of flying (autobiography) 
SUB-GRAVITY SENSATIONS 
AND GLIDING ACCIDENTS 
1977 
GOING SOLO 
1978 
UNDERSTANDING FLYING WEATHER 
1988 
now 2nd edition 
DEREK PIGGOTT ON GLIDING 
1990 
GLIDING SAFETY 
1991 
now 2nd edition 
SPINNING 
1993 
GROUND LAUNCHING 
1996 
MOTOR GLIDERS FOR TRAINING 
GLIDER PILOTS 
2000
Regular contributor to Sailplane and Gliding, Pilot, www.glidingmagazine.com 
and Soaring (U.S.) magazines. Published a series of instructional tape lectures 
on gliding and soaring.

--- PAGE 156 ---
166 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
TYPES OF AIRCRAFT FLOWN 
Troop Carrying gliders
Hotspur, Horsa, Waco CG4A Hadrian 
Light Gliders and Sailplanes - 180 types
Slingsby Cadet Tutor, T21a, T21b, T21c, T31, T38 Grasshopper 
Sky, Kite 1, Kite 2, Prefect, Gull 1, Gull 2, Gull 4, Petrel, Eagle, Capstan, 
Skylark 1, Skylark 2, Skylark 3 & 4, Dart, 15, 17R, T53 A & B Swallow, Swift, 
Vega, Sport Vega, Elliots of Newbury (EoN), Olympia 2b, 401, 402, 403, 405, 
419, 460, 463, SG38 Eton, Eon Baby, Peak 100, BG100 &135, Torva, SHK, 
Blanik, K4, K6CR, K6E, K7, K8, ASK13, ASK18, ASW15, ASW17, ASW19, 
ASW20, ASK21, ASK23, Libelle, Std Club, Hornet, Mosquito, Phoebus, Cirrus, 
Open, Standard, Nimbus, 3DT, DG500, LAK12, DG500 (22M), Mini-Nimbus, 
Nimbus 1 & 2, Nimbus 3, Ventus A& C, Grunau Baby, Kranich 2, Weihe, 
Minimoa, Rhonsperber, Rhon Buzzard, DG100, 101, 200, 201, 202, Astir CS, 
Club Astir, Twin Astir, Grab 103 Aero, Mucha Standard, Jaskolka, Pirat, Bocian, 
Foka, Cobra, Jantar Standard, Jantar 1&2, HP14, Schweizer, 1-26, 1-34, 1-35, 
1-36, 2-22, 2-33, 2-32, LS1, LS3, Osprey, Janus B&C, Spatz, Bergfalke 2, 3 & 
4, E.C.2, Canguro, Diamant, Pilatus B4, Fauvel AV36, Kestrel 17 &19, Kestrel 
22, Calif, Bijave, IS28, IS29, IS30, IS32, Hutter H17, SF27, SF34, Benson Gyro 
glider, Lemoine Ascending Parachute, Replica of Sir George Cayley's 1853 
glider, M200, Woodstock, TG2, LK Flat top, Eaglet, Manuel, Pegasus, Puchacz, 
Pelican, Sevimia S-20, Spyr 5, Discus, SZD Junior, Falke 1, Govier, IAR35, 
MG19A, Fauvel AV22, LolOO, Marianne, DG300, DG600, Kookaburra, Zephrs, 
Mod. ES52, Platypus, Grab Twin 3, L33, Velino, Russia 1 (ME7), PW-5, BAC7, 
Scud 2, Scud 3 EA9, MDM1 Fox, Duo-Discus, DG800S, ASH25, LAK 17A, 
Genesis, LS8, DG1000, Ventus 1 Turbo, Nimbus 3DT. 
Self Launching Motor Gliders (SLMG) - 27 types 
Slingsby T49, Spatz pv, IS28M1, IS28M2, ASK16, Ogar, PIK 20e, ASK14, 
Scheibe SF25a, SF25b, SF25c, SF25e Falkes, SF28 Tandem Falke, Grab 109 
a & b, RF5b Sperber, RF4 Milan, DG400, Dimona, Taifun, Janus CM, HB23, 
DG500M, Stemme S10, Vivat, Ximango, ASH26E, Super Dimona , Europa MG, 
Motor Spatz
Single engine aircraft -72 types
Tiger Moth, PT26 Cornell, Harvard, Auster (Cirrus, 5, 6 and other varients), 
Prentice, Spitfire Mk11, Balliol, Athena, Chipmunk, Emeraude, Messenger, 
Victor Airtourer, Air Trainer, Kittiwake, Super Cub (65, 90, 150 & 180 hp 
varients), Pawnee 150 & 235, Cherokee 140,180, & 6, Cessna 120, 150, 
150/150, 172, 180, 182, Stampe, BA4, Condor, Citabria, Wilga, Helio Courier, 
BA Swallow, Gipsy 1 Moth, SF260, Stearman PT17, Stinson L5, Jodel 95, 140, 
180, Beagle Pup, Moth Minor, Falco, Bolcow Junior, Piper Colt, Tri-Pacer, Tri- 
Traveller, Airdale, Husky, Morane 230, Rallye 100, 150, 180, Piston Provost, 
Caudron Luciolle, Mooney, Charger, Petrel, Slingsby T67, Fiesler Storch, 
Decathalon, Robin, Fugi, IS28M3, Jungmann, Caudron C270, Maule, Optica,

--- PAGE 157 ---
Appendix Two_________________________________________167
Grab 115, Rallye 235, Scirroco, Cassutt, Sky Arrow, E