 the English Channel. Unfortunately the Cirrus 
Moth tug could not climb towing the BAG VII higher than 6,000 feet and the 
attempt failed. In Edward's book there is a photograph of Dame Barbara standing 
by the glider which has her name in large letters painted on the cockpit sides. It is 
sad to reflect that now, sixty years later the Civil Aviation Authority, sometimes 
known as the Campaign Against Aviation, would regard that as aerial advertising 
and would probably order the name to be removed forthwith! Pity really, today the 
world is full of megalomaniacs who might be very eager to see their names on the 
sides of gliders and be prepared to pay big bucks for the privilege. The day after 
Mole's flight, Robert Kronfeld was towed to 12,000 feet over Boulogne in France 
and successfully crossed albeit east west before repeating the feat but this time 
from England to France and thus collected the prize. It is worth recording that the 
first Channel crossing completed by a woman pilot was Joan Meakin's, one of 
Alan Cobham's Flying Circus stunt pilots, later Mrs Ron Price, making her flight on 
5 April 1934 when she was towed by a light aeroplane at 80 miles an hour.

--- PAGE 67 ---
Chapter Nine - More of them and us
The feat for which Edward Mole will always be remembered must surely be 
his world looping record. Although present day soaring pilots would find it hard 
to believe, feats such as duration records and the greatest number of 
continuous loops were then highly regarded. Even famous soaring pilots took 
part in these bouts. In 1936 Robert Kronfeld had set the record at 65 loops, an 
American upped this to 85 and in 1937 Wolf Hirth, the German designer of the 
Grunau Baby, had achieved 125 successive loops at the Stuttgart air show.
On 12 April 1938, Edward Mole, flying a Hungarian designed M.22 Turul, 
climbed to 15,400 feet towed by a Hawker Audax, the RAF light bomber of the day, 
and proceeded to loop 147 times taking twenty five minutes to complete them. His 
Commanding officer flew the 'chase' aircraft with official observers who had to 
verify each loop just in case the barograph did not record them properly. Not 
surprisingly on stepping out of the glider, Edward fell straight over backwards!
At Redhill we flew all the hours we could. Those of us who were members of 
the Royal Air Force Voluntary Reserve unit based there were in clover. We would 
fly gliders until 9 am, then go across the airfield to the VR office, sign the attendance 
book and fly Tiger Moths and later Chipmunks for an hour. Then back to gliding until 
4pm when another hour's service flying completed your day's duty which qualified 
us for a day's pay, and then back to gliding for the remainder of the day. On non 
cross-country days, it broke the tedium of intensive instructing and helped to pay 
for one's gliding. But, as life teaches you so often, it was too good to last.
With the RAFVR unit, the civilian flying club and the Surrey Gliding Club all 
increasing their activities very dramatically, the airfield owners decided to import 
a proper fully qualified Air Traffic Controller. All power flying was forced to use 
correct radio procedure and we could not launch a glider until a signal from an 
Aldis lamp flashing a green light for 'go' was given by the tower. Truth to tell, our 
new Trafficator was not one of our greatest fans, a sentiment which we heartily 
reciprocated. One day in 1950, Ladi Marmol arrived overhead in his fully 
aerobatic Lunak L-107 sailplane and proceeded to give us a most spectacular 
display culminating in an inverted beat up of the control tower just as our friend 
was flashing every red light he could find, but to no avail. Not only was Ladi one 
of the most celebrated display pilots, after two previous attempts in April 1949 
he succeeded in establishing a new British Duration record by hill soaring the 
Dunstable Downs for just over 33 hours. A week after Ladi's aerobatic arrival, an 
RAFVR Tiger Moth practising a blind take-off (where the pilot is under a canvas 
hood and a safety pilot or instructor sits in the rear seat) flew into our winch 
cable just after the glider had released. The Tiger corkscrewed down the wire 
and was severely bent though, the pilots were relatively undamaged.
A further incident which made us sit up and take notice of the shape of 
things to come was when Colonel Whitbread of beer fame ran into a brick wall 
whilst taxiing his private aeroplane on the airfield. The worthy ex Army Major 
who had taken over as Secretary of the Flying Club was heard to say "Why 
didn't the fool take his foot off the accelerator?" The airfield was operated by 
British Air Transport Ltd. and this company was owned by the Douglas family.

--- PAGE 68 ---
A Glider PUot Bold...
Before the war Ann Edmonds as she then was (later Douglas, then Welch) had 
flown with the London Gliding Club at Dunstable where all the cross country 
flights were started with hill soaring on the west facing hill and continued 
downwind towards the Essex Coast. It was decided to find other hill sites in the 
South of England which faced other wind directions. As Ann wrote in an issue 
of the Lasham Magazine in the spring issue of 1973:
"There were the South Downs facing north, and the North Downs facing 
south; but the North Downs were a fine range of hills and between Dorking and 
Redhill in Surrey there were bits of hill that faced south west, and at Buckland 
there was a field large enough to winch from. On one SW wired day in the spring 
of 1938, we went there from Dunstable with five gliders and a bungey. We found 
a clear smooth patch of grass right on the edge of Colley Hill near Reigate and 
without further ado launched off. The locals were so astonished they forgot to 
object. We had a marvellous day but, for various very good reasons, Dunstable 
was not interested in starting another club there. I was! The hill gave good lift, in 
fact, the wind blew quite often from the south, and in any case the Buckland field 
was big enough to train from-if we could get it. But most encouraging of all was 
the enthusiasm of people who until now were too far from any gliding club. I knew 
we would get members all right, but the only person to begin with locally who 
knew anything about gliding was me.
With the supreme optimism of twentyone years, an 'A' licence on Gipsy 
Moths, all of six months on Daglings, and ownership of a Grunau bought for 
£50, I got down to starting the Surrey Gliding Club. The owner of Redhill 
airfield, Graham Douglas, agreed to provide the capital necessary to buy the 
equipment: 1 hangar, 1 winch, 1 primary glider with spares, 1 Tutor with spares, 
1 bungey, membership forms and log sheets etc. We bought everything for 
£300 and the first members erected the hangar. I found a couple of old bangers 
for cable retrieving and discovered someone willing to give us a substantial but 
some 15 feet by 12 feet for a club house".
In 1930 there had been a very active and successful Surrey Gliding Club 
operating at Lockner Farm, Chilworth near Guildford but like many other small 
clubs it ceased operating a year later.
Both Ann and Graham excelled as flying instructors, with Ann, surely the 
ultimate dynamic and energetic gliding enthusiast carrying out the duties of the 
Chief Instructor of the gliding club, and Graham the CFI of the RAFVR unit at 
Redhill. They were both very attractive vibrant people and friendship soon led 
to marriage. Soon after the outbreak of war Graham was posted with the whole 
of the RAFVR No. 15 Reserve Flying School to Carlisle and the now Mrs 
Douglas joined the Air Transport Auxiliary as a ferry pilot delivering a wide 
range of military types of aircraft. When Graham, after a further period of 
instructing was posted to a fighter squadron and Ann was delivering Hurricanes 
and Spitfires, I wonder how many husband and wife teams were doing the 
same. One nice part of her story is that her eldest daughter flew in a Spitfire 
when she was only a very few weeks before her actual birth day.

--- PAGE 69 ---
Chapter Xine - More of them and us____________________________/3
By 1951, however, their marriage had, in flying parlance, run out of runway 
and with all the other goings on we decided that we had almost certainly out 
stayed our welcome at Redhill. It was time to move on. Since 1949, we had 
realised that the day would come when due to collision hazards and 
considerable delays due to congestion we would have to find a new home. Ann 
and the Club Secretary, Dukinfield-Jones, were dispatched to talk to Airports 
Ltd. whose nearby airfield called Gatwick suited our purposes exactly. The talks 
went well but at the last moment the Ministry of Aviation stepped in and stopped 
us. It transpired that they had some long term ambition to build a somewhat 
larger passenger airfield there on the site. We searched high and low for a 
suitable home for the next two years. Detling in Kent was too far, Smith's Lawn 
in Windsor Great Park too close to Heathrow, London's expanding airport. 
Blackbushe, just north of Farnborough in Hampshire, was dismissed because 
of the 'fraught' dilapidated buildings and we would not be in charge of the 
airfield. A number of other airfields were ruled out for various reasons.
The planning sub committee members reported that they were in favour of 
having our own site, that a field might do but preferably it should be an airfield, 
that airfields south of the Thames were out and that therefore an easily 
accessible site north east of London seemed the best bet. Just such an airfield 
was found, built during the war, good runways and grass, very dilapidated 
buildings but very near the end of the London Underground Terminus. It was 
called Chipping Ongar and is about 18 kilometres almost due south of what is 
now Stanstead International Airport!
On a large map we had plotted the homes of all our members to see 
whether we should go east or west. By a very few members, it seemed that 
going west would be more equitable which was most fortunate for the 
subsequent history of gliding in this country. Thankfully the gods smiled on us 
as we chose not Chipping Ongar airfield but decided on Lasham in Hampshire 
where the Army Gliding Club had the airfield all to themselves, having moved 
there from Odiham. Redhill had been a great home for us, our soaring fleet of 
one Weihe and four Olympias made us the best equipped club in the country 
and we took every advantage of the weather on each and every day. The 
members were a well balanced mix of wartime pilots, a large number of young 
people including students from the imperial College of Science and Technology 
and many frustrated would-be pilots who, though mad keen to fly were not able 
to do so during the war for various reasons. This blend of experience and youth 
was highly beneficial to all, not only in matters of aviation but also the lively 
social activities in which we indulged.
By far the most important asset was the presence of our leader, mentor, 
teacher and friend, Lome Welch. Without him we might just have been a fairly 
mediocre club. As most of our members had to earn a living and thus suffered 
serious withdrawal symptoms during the week, Hugo Trotter and I started a 
weekly lunch in a London Fleet Street hostelry called The Cock Tavern'. We 
soon attracted so many like minded glider pilots that we moved, first to a

--- PAGE 70 ---
74 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
Cypriot cafe close to Westminster Bridge where we drove the owner to despair 
by always insisting on 'corner baclava'. This Greek sweet is baked in large flat 
dishes and by demanding the corner pieces we ensured that we invariably got 
more than our fair share. When even that venue proved too small, we started 
the Kronfeld Club in a basement in Eccleston Square in Westminster. This 
proved an enormous success with lectures every week on very varied gliding 
and other aviation topics which were always a sell out. As Hugo Trotter, 
Godfrey Harwood (the Surrey Club Treasurer) and his wife Rika, Peter Riddock 
the Secretary of the Surrey Club and Margaret and I all lived in the Square, we 
soon became known as the Eccleston Square Mob and were not the favourite 
people in Ann Welch's eyes as she was soon to make way for Hugo as the 
elected Chairman of the Surrey Club.
One day a number of talented members, including my wife, displayed some 
of their aviation paintings. Thus out of the Kronfeld Art Society grew the Guild 
of Aviation Artists, which continues to encourage, show and sell aviation art 
throughout the World.
In this and many other ways, ever egged on by Lome Welch, the members 
gained great pleasure and satisfaction, not only in flying gliders, but also in 
helping to develop the sport in its widest sense for the good of all.
Good bye and Hallo
Words by Hugo Trotter Tine as 'Jingle Bells'
Beaverettes, wireless sets 
Beans on buttered toast 
Locking wire, punctured tyre 
Halfway to the coast
Jerry cans, frying pans 
Going to the Comps 
5 mile flights, boozy nights 
Little Hucklow romps
Austertow, very slow 
Will we leave the ground 
Sewage farm, must keep calm 
Green ball gives a bound
Thermal hats, yellow bats 
Bobbing up and down 
Wet weekend, round the bend 
Now we're hangar bound
Dunstable, unstable
Sitting on the hill
Wires are taut, things are fraught
Blimey I feel ill

--- PAGE 71 ---
Chapter Nine - More of them and us___________________________75
Cable breaks, pilot shakes 
Does a dicey turn 
Landing ground, crunching sound 
Will he never learn.
Friston site, coastal flight 
Down to Beachy Head 
Seaford cafe, feel unsafe 
Two in single bed 
Cambridge town, cap and gown 
Auto tows at Bourn, 
Redhill 'drome, that's our home 
Filthy, tired and worn
V R kites, give us frights
We are forced to go
And we're found Hampshire bound
Beaverettes in tow,
Golden Pot, just the spot 
Lasham is quite near 
Army types, smoking pipes 
Watney's Alton beer

--- PAGE 72 ---
Chapter 10
The Lasham Airfield history
T
he Lasham lands have a most fascinating history which deserves to be 
fully recorded by someone better qualified than this author. The village 
and the adjacent airfield are perched on a hill six hundred feet above sea 
level in north east Hampshire, an area of England rich in historical sites and 
ruins dating back to the Norman Conquest in 1066. Local history goes back 
even further as we discovered when a Times newspaper photographer took a 
picture of Tony Deane-Drummond practising over Lasham before the start of 
the 1957 National Championships. When the superb air to air shot of the glider 
was published, under one wing in the field below was clear evidence of a round 
barrow of pre-Roman times which until then nobody had known was there. 
People have lived in the area since the early Bronze age. The Lasham area 
formed part of Edward the Confessor's Crown lands and is named in the 
Doomsday Book. By 1086, after the Norman Conquest twenty years earlier, it 
was assessed at two and a half hides. From then on there were many changes 
of tenant who were, of course, the Lords of the Manor. In 1314 Walter de 
Aberval was granted 'a messuage' and land in Lessham to hold for his life, 
promising in addition to "provide the King with two robes worth forty shillings 
every year as long as he lived". That must have been a veritable fortune in 
those days and one wonders what other service he was obliged to offer his 
Royal landlord. What would Walter de Aberval have said had he known that 
nearly seven hundred years later his successors to the Lasham Lands, the 
members of the Lasham Gliding Society, were paying as rent one peppercorn 
a year (but only if called for), to the Crown?. It is only fair to mention that during 
the interval of the thirty Kings and Queens who have sat on the throne since 
1314, the lands still designated as 'Crown property' actually belong to The 
State' and LGS in 1989 bought a lease from The State' of part of the lands for 
a 'consideration' amounting to £180,000. Perhaps some clever clogs could tell 
us which amount is the greater in real purchasing power; the forty shillings in 
1314 or the nearly £200,000 which includes the lawyers and other costs we 
paid in 1991 although the lease was backdated to 1989?
Earlier, in 1297, the 3rd Earl of Ulster had taken possession and when 
Edward Plantagenet, the tenth Earl of Ulster and 4th Duke of York ascended 
the throne in 1461 as Edward IV, the Lasham lands were combined with the 
Royal Castle of Odiham. In 1775 the Jervoise (pronounced Jarvis) family who, 
through marriage had held the adjoining Manor of Herriard since the early part 
of the 13th Century, bought the Lasham Manor and the enlarged estate has 
been in their possession ever since. When we arrived at Lasham, the then 
Squire, Major Francis Henry Tristram Jervoise was a splendid character who 
not only took great pride in his estate but was a most enlightened employer and 
landowner. The lot of his tenants and the quality of his fields were greatly

--- PAGE 73 ---
78
A Glider Pilot Bold...
improved by the water piped by the Herriard and Lasham Water Company 
which he created. He continued the family tradition of planting a great number 
of trees and was very upset when the contractors building the airfield in 1942 
cut down a large number of the beech trees. These lined the Avenue which 
runs for a mile along the northern side of the airfield and had been planted by 
George Jervoise in 1809. Our Squire had a flock of Black Welsh mountain 
sheep and all his suits were made of homespun cloth using their wool. When 
coming back to Lasham by air or by road, the sight of those black sheep in the 
field of Herriard Park always gave me a warm glow and the certain knowledge 
that home was only half a mile away.
The pronunciation and indeed spelling of Lasham has changed over the years. 
It was Esseham in the 11th Century, Lessham in the 12th, Lesseham, Lasseham, 
Lassham and Lassam up to the 16th. Soon after starting flying at Lasham, we 
went to call on the Squire in order to explain who we were, what we were about 
and promising to behave. The first time I said 'Lasham' in what is now accepted 
as the normal pronunciation, the Squire exploded and said " Boy, it is LASSAM, it 
has always been LASSAM and don't you ever forget it!". When some time later 
Raymond Baxter, Brian Johnston and I did the first of many live BBC outside 
broadcasts from Lasham we were most careful to get the pronunciation right but 
unfortunately the BBC announcer introducing the programme undid our good 
work. The Squire was on the 'phone like a flash and ordered me to tell 'those 
Broadcasting fellahs' to correct their mistake. Some of the locals still use the 
correct' Lassam' to this day, over the years some glider pilots have been known to 
pronounce it 'Splasham', but in the main, the rest of the world calls it 'Lasham'.
BBC outside broadcast - Raymond Baxter interviewing \Vally Kahn (author)

--- PAGE 74 ---
Chapter Ten - The Lasham Airfield history 
________________79
Most of the land is heavy clay with a chalk subsoil and was farmed growing 
crops chiefly wheat, oats and turnips. Before the First World War various Army 
cavalry units used it for training manoeuvres and gallops. To this day there is a 
group of cottages just north of the airfield in Southrope still known as The 
Barracks'. The senior recorded ghost who is said to roam the airfield is a 
cavalryman astride a horse and wearing a long coat! The other one is said to 
be that of a Polish Mosquito pilot in full flying gear who was killed close to the 
airfield. After fifty plus years at Lasham I have never seen either ghost but 
would love to be the third one when my time comes. What fun I could have...!
The airfield was built in late 1942 and early 1943 and the first aircraft landed 
there in March 1943. On 2 January 1943 the German Luftwaffe sent a Dornier 
bomber to strafe, bomb and harass the builders. Our High Command quickly 
got the message and sent an advance party from No. 4165 Anti Aircraft Flight 
which duly arrived on the 10th of January. There are many stories told about 
the construction period. The place must have resembled the Tower of Babel as 
Canadian, Irish and English and Italian and other prisoners of war were 
engaged in the building work. A murder, mayhem, black market activities, 
especially in the 'Golden Pot' and other events will hopefully be recorded one 
day and will make fascinating reading.
On commissioning in March 1943 as a Fighter Command airfield, the first 
operational unit was No. 175 Squadron, then equipped with Hawker Hurricane 
IIBs. Then various Spitfire and Typhoon squadrons were there until in August 
of that year when Lasham was transferred to the 2nd Tactical Air Force, it 
become the home of 2 Group's No. 138 Wing. This consisted of the Dutch No. 
320, the Polish No. 305 and RAF No. 613 Squadrons, later to be joined by No. 
107, all equipped with Mosquitoes. A wide variety of targets were on the 
receiving end of the 138 Wing punch. The concrete launching ramps of the 
pilotless V1 Doodlebug which were springing up all over the place behind the 
French coast were favourite targets and the code name given to these raids 
showed that even in war some people still have a sense of humour. They were 
called The Noball sites'. But the most dramatic and famous operation took 
place on 11 April 1944 when Wing Commander Bob Bateson led six 
Mosquitoes of 613 Squadron on a raid designed to destroy the Kuntzall Art 
Gallery in the centre of The Hague in Holland. The building, which housed the 
Dutch Central Population Registry, where the Gestapo kept records of Dutch 
families for reprisal purposes, had five floors and was ninety five feet high. 
Bateson was ordered to destroy the building but not to damage the houses on 
either side and this he and his crews accomplished to the letter.
In the autumn of 1944, No. 138 Wing moved from Lasham, leaving the 
airfield temporarily unoccupied, to Hartfordbridge (now called Blackbushe) 
which No. 137 Wing (in which I was a very minor player) had vacated on our 
move to Vitry en Artois in France. Of the few days I spent at Lasham on 
detachment in late August 1944, all that really comes to mind were the visits to 
the dingy 'beer and cider only' public house called The Royal Oak in Lasham

--- PAGE 75 ---
80 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
village. The 'Oak' is still going strong, producing very nourishing food, a vast 
variety of intoxicating fluid and has an extremely friendly atmosphere. All in all 
a great village pub, well worth a visit.
At the end of 1944, the airfield reverted to Fighter Command who used it as the 
Disbandment Centre before closing on 26 October 1948. David Ince in his very 
readable book, Combat and Competition, in which he details his experiences as a 
wartime Fighter Pilot, then a civilian test pilot through to his gliding days, wrote:
"On 7 September 1945 I led my (No. 193) Squadron back to England to 
Lasham where we carried out a final stream landing. In the dispersals they were 
doing dreadful things to an earlier batch of Typhoons. Wings and fuselages, 
stripped to bare shells, were being lined up in closely packed rows and bulldozed 
together, for all the world like a giant scrap baling press. Tomorrow, or the day 
after, our aircraft would be under the hammer".
During March 1945, General Aircraft Ltd took over two of the four large T2 
Hangars, the dimensions of which are 240 feet by 120 feet, and some of the 
other buildings to carry out contracts for the maintenance and conversion of 
Mosquitoes and other types of aircraft. Later they were to carry out flight trials 
of their experimental tailless gliders. In the winter of 1948 Chipperfield Circus 
occupied the western hangar and during a particularly cold spell one of their 
elephants died. It appears that they dug a very large hole and buried the poor 
beastie there. Surely Lasham must be the only airfield in the world which can 
boast an elephant grave and one wonders what future archaeologists will think 
when they excavate our site and find bombs, bullets and an elephant skeleton! 
Rumours are still rife about the various 'goodies' buried in the dell behind the 
main control tower including, it is alleged, two brand new Merlin engines.
The Army Gliding Club based on the RAF Odiham airfield was able to 
organise a few courses at Lasham in 1948 and 1949 and in June 1951, under 
the guidance and Chairmanship of Tony Deane-Drummond, then an instructor 
at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, moved its operation to Lasham 
permanently. Of the four T2 Hangars at Lasham, the northern one (which has 
since been demolished) was still in use by General Aircraft Ltd. The one 
currently used as the gliding hangar was in such a poor state of repair that it 
was not even considered; the southern one was deemed to be too remote, but 
the one recently vacated by the Circus was not only in excellent repair but also 
still had an ample supply of clean hay in one corner which came in very useful 
when de-rigging gliders without trailers.
In August 1951 Surrey and Imperial College members moved all our goods 
and chattels, which loosely meant anything that was not screwed down, and we 
established ourselves at Lasham.

--- PAGE 76 ---
Chapter Ten - The Lasham Airfield history
81
\Vally Kahn (Author) in his Skylark 3 over Lasham 
\\ally Kahn ; Author) flying his Dart 17R

--- PAGE 77 ---
Chapter 11
Robert Kronfeld
V
ery many famous glider pilots have flown from Lasham and many more will 
surely do so in the future, but no one will be able to outclass one of the 
greatest of them all. It is a remarkable quirk of fate that Lasham, which has 
developed as the largest gliding centre in the world, should be the very place 
from which Robert Kronfeld took off for the last flight of his life. The fatal crash 
occurred on February 12, 1948 at Lower Froyle, just three miles east of the 
Airfield. Born in Vienna on May 5, 1904, his early passions were his violin, skiing 
and mountain climbing. He also achieved great fame in his kayak before being 
bitten by the gliding bug in 1927. By the following year he was an instructor at the 
Wasserkuppe, which was by then the Mecca for all glider pilots. He was the first 
to realise that up currents below cumulus clouds could be used to achieve cross- 
country flights and quickly established new world distance records. He is credited 
with the development of the variometer which some of his competitors initially 
regarded as a form of cheating. As soon as the instruments were readily available 
to others, the jealousy ceased. He was also the first pilot to climb in a 
thunderstorm when in 1929 he doubled the world height record.
When, in February 1931, the Federation Aeronautique Internationale 
instituted the Silver 'C' badge, Kronfeld, Hirth and Groenhoff were the first three 
recipients. The accounts of his pioneering flights make fascinating reading for 
the modern pilot who tends to take high performance and sophisticated 
instrumentation for granted. His book, Kronfeld on Gliding and Soaring, is an 
absolute masterpiece but regretfully copies are extremely hard to find.
The Austria, designed and built for him in 1932 specifically for very efficient 
hill soaring with a span of thirty metres, broke up in cloud when violent up- 
currents caused the wing tips to break off, forcing him to escape by parachute. 
Later, in his beloved Wien, a mere twenty metre span glider, he carried out a 
great number of spectacular flights.
He came to England in 1933 as a refugee from Nazi persecution and over 
the next few years gave gliding demonstrations in the USA and all over Europe. 
In May 1933 he used a most dramatic thermal by soaring over Mount Vesuvius 
during an eruption and had by that year completed over 10,000km in aero towed 
flights on his way to various assignments. He was the first pilot to soar across 
the top of the Matterhorn, a feat repeated by his son Bill in 1963. In June 1938 
he was appointed manager and Chief Instructor of the new Oxford University & 
City Gliding Club and at the outbreak of the war a year later joined the Royal Air 
Force. He was soon posted to a very strange unit misnamed The Central 
Landing School' at Ringway near Manchester, now Manchester International 
Airport, the pride of the North! The story of the unit has been recorded by 
Laurence Wright, he of the Pyramid spoof, in his book The Wooden Sword. As 
this chapter is meant as a tribute to Robert Kronfeld, I asked Mike Maufe who

--- PAGE 78 ---
84 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
worked closely with him and all the other glider pilots who had also been brought 
to Ringway to let us share some of his memories. Not only did Mike come up 
trumps but furthermore added his 'Memories of Ringway 1940-1942'. He wrote:
"Enclosed is a copy of my 'Memories' which I found. It will give some idea of the 
sort of work which we were involved in during the war but not too much about 
Robert himself. Although we shared an office, he was very reserved and I never got 
to know him intimately. After dinner in the Officers Mess, he would nearly always 
go straight back to his room. He was dedicated to his work, both to his test flying 
and the technical calculations and reports which he produced. For instance, I have 
no doubt that his report on the very primitive Tow Cable Angle Indicator 
(affectionately known as The Angle of Dangle') which we built in our workshop will 
have influenced the final design produced by RAE Famborough. With his long and 
meritorious pre war gliding experience and high technical qualifications, Robert 
was the ideal choice for Chief Test Pilot in the Airborne Forces Experimental 
Establishment and his Air Force Cross was well deserved. I was privileged to have 
flown with him. He was 'reserve' best man for our wedding in case my young 
brother couldn't get leave for it!"
A few short extracts from 'Memories of Ringway 1940-1942' by Mike Maufe 
(Silver 'C' No.40 and a leading light of the Vintage Glider Club) state: "When I 
arrived at Ringway in November 1940 I found that the unit included over a dozen 
pre war glider pilots, several of whom I knew. Apparently, we were the 'founder 
members' of a future Airborne Force ordered to be formed by Winston Churchill 
when he heard that the German Army had captured a vital fort in Belgium using 
glider borne troops. The Central Landing School consisted of a Parachute 
Training School and a Tactical Development Unit commanded by Wing 
Commander 'Mungo' Buxton, the well known glider designer and pilot, and to 
which unit I was posted. From this was later on formed the Glider Training School 
which moved down to RAF Thame near Aylesbury early in 1941 where the Army 
glider pilots were trained. The Chief Test Pilot was Robert Kronfeld with whom I 
was to work very closely, and frequently fly with. Other members of the unit, all 
glider pilots were: Norman Sharpe, the Chairman of the Yorkshire Gliding Club; 
Tim Hervey, former Manager and then Chief Instructor of the London Club; 
Lawrence Wright the architect; Robin Fender; Pat Pringle; 'Pop' Furlong; 'Wilkie' 
Wilkinson and a number of others. The only aircraft we had to begin with were all 
requisitioned privately owned or club gliders: Philip Wills's Minimoa, the 
'Rhonbussard' belonging to the Pasold brothers, Eustace Thomas's 'Condor', 
Roy Scott's Viking' and three Kirby Kites. A Viking two seater was also at 
Ringway for a short time until it shed its wings during an unauthorised display of 
aerobatics by Wilkinson. Another twelve Kirby Kites were allocated to the Glider 
Training School. It can easily be imagined that the atmosphere at Ringway was 
more like that of a civilian gliding club than a normal service unit, which tended 
to cause some friction with the Regular Service Officers. For instance, when the 
pilots, who knew quite a lot about gliders, tried to pass them out as airworthy 
themselves, they were told that this should only be done by qualified technical

--- PAGE 79 ---
Chapter Eleven - Robert Kronfeld_____________________________85
personnel who at that time knew nothing about gliders! Furthermore trying to get 
glider pilots to perform routine drill movements smartly proved to be impossible 
and eventually they were excused parades".
At the first meeting of the British Gliding Association held after the war, Robert 
Kronfeld represented the Oxford Club and thus helped Dudley Hiscox the 
Chairman to restart the Association's sterling work for the movement which has 
continued ever since. On leaving the Air Force he joined General Aircraft Ltd. as 
the Chief Test Pilot to research the flight characteristics of tailless gliders. Four 
types, designated GA 56 Mark 1 to Mark 4 were built. Captain Eric 'Winkle' 
Brown, the former Chief Naval 'lest Pilot and Commanding Officer of the 
renowned Aerodynamics Flight at the Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough, 
and who is listed in the Guinness Book of Records as having flown more types 
of aircraft than any other pilot in the world, describes flying them in his book, 
Wings of the Weird & Wonderful, as "the worst aircraft I have ever flown". On 12 
February 1948, Kronfeld and his Observer, Barry MacGowan, took off from 
Lasham and were towed to 17,000 feet behind a Halifax four engined bomber. It 
is interesting to note that a Spitfire Mark IX was used as the tug aircraft when 
Winkle Brown was testing the GA 56 at Farnborough. While carrying out highly 
dangerous stall manoeuvres, the aircraft failed to respond to any recovery action. 
Barry MacGowan sitting in the rear seat behind Kronfeld writes:
"Things happened very rapidly, and when I resumed my technical interest, I 
saw that we were going straight down at 200 knots! At this stage Robert realised 
that the machine was out of control and decided to abandon ship. In reconstruction, 
it appeared that the rapid dive after the stall, with the elevator trimmer at fully 
forward, resulted in the build up of large forward stick forces which were 
overpowering. Calculations suggested that Robert was pulling back with up to 80 
pounds, yet the aircraft was still accelerating. The first action to escape was to 
reach up to jettison the canopy. In so doing he would have lost about 30 pounds 
pull back on the stick. Again, later calculations suggested that would have resulted 
in an immediate 5G negative. Certainly, the next thing I remembered was my 
portable oxygen bottle hurtling past my left side, and crashing into the canopy. At 
that stage we both 'redded-out' in this negative G. Presumably as Robert became 
unconscious, and released all his grip, more negative G followed.
I am perpetually grateful to GALs designers that in spite of probably being 
above VNE, the aircraft remained in one piece and absorbed such a 
punishment. At some later stage, I briefly recovered consciousness. The aircraft 
was upside down, perfectly stable, and certainly not in a spin. I realised that 
Robert was also still in the aircraft, not answering, but I could not get to him in 
the tandem cockpit arrangement, separated as we were by a substantial 
structure. I didn't seem to make any conscious attempt to move, and 'redded 
out' again. Then some time later, quite automatically, and literally in an unseeing 
red haze, I found myself jettisoning the canopy, releasing the seat harness, 
falling straight out of the upside down TS507 and pulling the rip cord. The 
opening jerk of the 'chute cleared my eyes, so that I was able to see to land. The

--- PAGE 80 ---
86 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
great tragedy of the affair was that Robert must never have recovered 
consciousness at all. This was later related just to his age. The one consolation 
to us all is that he certainly was never aware of the descent or crash and 
therefore did not suffer any fear or pain."
The glider crashed at 11.45 into a field. Strangely, Robert Kronfeld died just 
a few days after that other great pioneer of flying, Orville Wright. Wolf Hirth 
wrote a full and very sensitive obituary, which concluded:
"After twenty fruitful years of devotion to the cause of human flight this great and 
good man had been granted an airman's sudden splendid death. His name like his 
deeds will never be forgotten. Robert Kronfeld lives on in every soaring flight".
He would have been delighted to know that Robert's son Bill and his 
grandson, Simon, are both very active Lasham based Gold 'C' pilots, thus the 
wonderful family tradition continues in safe hands. Robert Kronfeld's legacy to 
us glider pilots is incalculable.
i 
The permanent Kronfeld memorial in the Lasham
clubhouse. There is a small brass plaque which 
i 
reads "Robert Kronfeld 1904-1948. The
* 
International Gliding pioneer and \Vorld Record
holder whose expertise led to the development of 
soaring flight and the modern gliding movement. 
He lost his life testing a military glider at Lasham
Soaring techniques, instructing, aerotowing, powered gliders, instrumentation 
to name but a few were some aspects of our sport which he invented and 
developed-no man has ever done more.

--- PAGE 81 ---
Chapter 12
Lasham
A
t Redhill we were spoilt with running water, flushing lavatories, a squash 
court, a comfortable wooden clubhouse and the three very friendly bars 
on the airfield which often provided splendid entertainment and highly 
amusing characters. None of us will forget some of the Surrey Flying Club 
members such as Ted the wealthy butcher, whose girlfriend was the extremely 
well built Ada (our parachute packer), and the Public Relations gent, who 
insisted on handing over endless five pound notes in their bar so that all 
present could quench their thirst until they were totally legless. His girlfriend 
was a model in the 'knickers and bras' world much in demand by us and Dudley 
Hiscox's company called 'Ambrose Wilson' which specialised in very artistic 
mail order catalogues of lingerie items. Thus the superb flying facilities were 
amply augmented by the flying equivalent of 'apres ski'.
Lasham, however, was something else. We knew that we would have to 
start from scratch and so liberated (a wartime euphemism for pinching though 
not really considered as stealing) anything considered of possible use at our 
new home. One raiding party at Redhill put an end to this when I was 
despatched to retrieve a wooden door which was lying on the floor of a long 
abandoned Nissen but on the far side of the airfield. Not wishing to be too 
obvious, I tied a long piece of old winch cable to the door, the other end to a 
Beaverette and proceeded to drive back to our hangar. Well pleased with this 
ploy, which I felt certain would not be noticed, life came to an abrupt and sticky 
end when a large motor car being driven by old man Douglas, Graham's father, 
came alongside. He demanded to know what the hell was going on. Apparently, 
he had come on to the airfield by an old road which was hardly ever used to be 
confronted by the cable that should not have been there moving across the 
ground. Somewhat puzzled he sat there until suddenly the door appeared. To 
say that he was not best pleased would be a major understatement.
Wood for doors and other building works was essential and luckily a friend 
who had just closed a very old fashioned tobacco shop in Pall Mall agreed to 
give us all the wood panelling and anything else we wanted. We hurried up to 
town with a glider trailer and in next to no time the shop was bare and the trailer 
was very very full. In those days our police force did not like or understand 
glider trailers. Indeed, in their little black book it stated that they were 
considered too long to be towed on public roads behind private vehicles. 
Whenever we were stopped by a keen young constable we would explain that 
a glider was an indivisible load, refer the officer to page 78 of his police book 
and proceed merrily on our way. That is fine if you do not happen to be driving 
in a Royal Park, and Hyde Park in London is so designated. "Stop" said your 
man in blue "Don't you know you can't tow commercial trailers behind private

--- PAGE 82 ---
A Glider Pilot Bold...
cars and what's more no commercial vehicles are allowed to use the roads in 
Royal Parks". Quick as a flash someone said "But Officer, it is an indivisible 
load, to wit a glider". "Let's see it" said the law. "Sorry, we can't show it to you, 
we have lost the key and have to go back to Hampshire to get the glider out". 
Thankfully he believed us but we learnt yet another valuable lesson. When 
moving things other than gliders in a trailer, don't drive through Hyde Park!
The Cambridge Club did not learn from our experience. Professor John 
Pringle was offered a dead whale which had died on an Essex beach. Being 
Chairman of the Cambridge Club he asked his CFI Ken Machin to collect it for 
him. Off went Ken with another club member and in no time the whale was 
safely stowed inside their glider trailer. On the way home while still in the County 
of Essex, they were stopped by the law. "Don't you know that towing a long 
trailer behind a private vehicle is illegal" said the man in blue. Quick as a flash, 
Ken replied "If you look in your little black book, you will see that glider trailers 
are exempt, they are covered under the section dealing with indivisible loads". 
"Oh, its a glider in there, lets see it". "Well actually, officer, not this time, it's a 
dead whale". The policeman was somewhat taken aback, threatened to charge 
them for trying to make a fool of him, contravening a Ministry of Food byelaw 
concerned with the transport of dead animals and lastly what he thought was his 
trump card, the use of a glider trailer towed by a private vehicle. He then took 
his little black book out of his pocket but unfortunately it did not contain the 
relevant section. When he was shown and smelled the dead whale, he gave up 
and let them off with a severe wigging. As they drove into Cambridgeshire, they 
were stopped again by another policeman. "Don't worry, officer" Ken said, "you 
need't look in your little black book, the section on indivisible loads is not in 
there". "That's all right" said the arm of the law, "I've got the big black book with 
me, let's see if we can find it there!". Happily it is in the big book.
At Lasham we had taken over the secondary tower as our clubhouse and 
everyone set to with a vengeance. First we built a splendid bar on the first floor 
and Lionel Alexander, then not yet the Prosecuting Barrister of the Crime 
Department of the Inland Revenue, pleaded our case in front of the Licensing 
Magistrates. "All they have as a bar are two beer crates and a plank of wood" 
he told them and they believed him! As we had no running water it was decided 
to purloin a 400 gallon water tank and site it over the stairs on two concrete 
beams which Dick Watson made specially. Three times we carried the damn 
thing up, three times Lome Welch vetoed the idea as he reckoned the building 
was not strong enough. So we waited until he went home, took it back up again 
and cemented the beams into position.
Dick Watson at that time worked for the Concrete Development Company so 
he knew a thing or two. He is a great guy who was always pressed into service 
as the head cook on our gliding expeditions. The story of how he met his 
delightful wife is worth recording. One day while going to work by London 
Underground he saw a filly who immediately made him sit up and take notice. 
He caught the same train the next day and there she was again. Being very shy

--- PAGE 83 ---
Chapter Twelve — Lasham
he decided to sit opposite her and let her know all about himself. The first day 
he read the Concrete Engineer, the next the Imperial College students 
magazine, then Sailplane and Gliding and soon Jean, the object of his affection, 
caught on and started with The Nursing Gazette, The Physiotherapist journal 
and other revealing papers. As he carried an attache case which bore his initials 
'R.V.W.' she decided that he must be called Rip Van Winkle. Some weeks later 
they happened to literally bump into each other and actually spoke. The rest as 
they say is history. One day Dick mentioned that a friend of his mother's had an 
upright piano which was surplus to requirements and wondered whether we 
would like it for Lasham. No sooner offered and we were off with an open tipper 
truck which Dick borrowed from work to collect the piano from a very posh 
house in Chelsea. After thanking our benefactor and promising to take good 
care of her pride and joy, though in truth rather dilapidated, we loaded up and 
off we went. The temptation was too much for us and we decided to take turns 
playing the piano whilst being driven round Piccadilly Circus. We managed three 
laps before we were forcibly moved on and warned never to do that again. It was 
by then rather late in the day and Dick offered to park the truck outside his family 
home in St John's Wood. As his stepfather was the most senior civil servant in 
the Air Ministry he thought that none of the neighbours would object.
Next morning a young policeman knocked on the door and asked Lady 
Campbell whether she knew anything about one tipper truck plus piano parked 
in her very select area of London. "Must be my son's, no problem, don't worry" 
was her reply. When we got it down to Lasham, sad to relate, it only survived 
one party before some drunks threw it down the stairs.
Throwing out of tune pianos down concrete stairs makes a lovely noise and 
will enliven any party. Thereafter we collected old pianos wherever we could 
and they became an essential part of our entertainment.
The lack of running water was a serious problem as emptying Elsan buckets 
was not a popular pastime and our girls, who performed miracles in our 
makeshift kitchen, were getting decidedly stroppy. A chance visit to a machinery 
exhibition produced the solution. I spotted a large gleaming piece of machinery 
which for all I knew could be making railway engines or something equally 
bizarre until at the back of the monster it became all too clear what the final 
product was. Out of a hole came yard after yard of black plastic piping which 
was being fed onto a huge roller. "Are you interested in our latest machine?" 
asked a salesman. Before I could answer, the sales manager spotted me; in 
those days I was wearing regulation City gear complete with bowler hat and 
rolled umbrella and he obviously thought that anyone dressed in that garb was 
either very important or someone from Head Office, and came rushing over. "No 
Sir, your machine is quite splendid, but to be honest I am interested in what it is 
making" and before he had a chance of going off, I launched into "We are a poor 
gliding club, helping the young especially University students to sample flying, 
our place in the world, the need to encourage air mindedness remember the 
Battle of Britain etc etc" and finishing up with "What are you going to do with all

--- PAGE 84 ---
90 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
that black piping you are making when the exhibition is over?". Happily a deal 
was struck and we finished up with two miles of lovely two inch diameter black 
plastic piping which we had laid from a mains at Avenue Farm to the clubhouse 
at a total cost of less than £500. It is still in use to this day.
Now we were in business and not only altered our lavatory called 'Palazzo 
Elsano' into a fully flushing luxury privy but also set about the soak away 
problem. A huge hole was called for and Colonel John Lathbury persuaded 
some of the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst cadets to help dig it. It was to 
be a mammoth hole, 15 feet by 10 feet and 10 feet deep and we warned the 
young gentlemen that John was a very strict disciplinarian who knew the 
Commandant of their Academy very well. In fact John was a pussy cat but we 
wanted the hole dug with no slacking. By the time the hole was seven feet 
deep, all the young lads had dropped from exhaustion except one who was 
determined not to be beaten. He was Simon Marriott and he has proved his 
worth to Queen, the Country and the Gliding movement ever since. It is said 
that he is the only person who can keep Ralph Jones in order, a rare feat 
indeed. It was Simon who crewed for that real tiger, Tony Deane-Drummond, 
in the National Championships the following year. On being asked what it was 
like said "It was rather like being a juryman in a murder trial, once you have 
done it, you should be exempt for life!"
In order to keep our flying fees to a minimum, and to avoid spending money 
unnecessarily, all the members were persuaded to undertake even the most 
menial and boring jobs. One such which was not very popular was the 
'Beaverette run in'. After every overhaul or engine change, the Beaverettes 
which we used for cable towing had to be driven very carefully at no more than 
thirty miles an hour for five hundred miles until the engine had been adequately 
run in. It required sixteen members each taking a one hour stint, driving round 
the airfield to complete the task.
Mike Neale, who was our mechanical transport genius, decided that it 
would be more fun to drive the Beaver down to Cornwall and back. Off he went 
with another Imperial College member as co-driver. When they reached 
Exeter early in the morning, they found themselves stopped right behind a 
policeman on point duty at a crossroad.
Cut down armoured cars are not often seen in the City of Exeter and our 
man in blue was eager to add to his fund of knowledge. As he approached he 
stopped, sniffed the air and then saw a sight which was not in the policeman's 
training syllabus. Mike was busily cooking bacon and eggs on a primus stove. 
"What the bloody hell, what do you think you are doing?"Cooking breakfast" said 
Mike "would you like some?" Having crewed in various World Championships, 
Mike decided that in order to improve VHP radio communication, he would 
design and build a telescopic aerial. At this point it is necessary to explain that 
he is a very famous tribologist in great demand all over the world. In case you 
do not know the definition of tribology, it is the science and technology of 
surfaces in relatively moving contact.

--- PAGE 85 ---
Chapter Twelve - Lasham___________ 
91
So Mike built his device. Four sections sliding on nylon guide strips, each 
ten feet high made of best quality strong timber. The seals were made using 
domestic draught excluder and the whole structure weighed about 3 cwt. The 
erection method was to attach a pipe to the bottom of the aerial and the other 
end to the exhaust pipe of Mike's Jaguar. The initial tests were carried out in 
secret but everyone was eager to be present for the final test. "Start the engine, 
increase the revs." Nothing happened. "More revs still more". Suddenly the first 
smallest section appeared, shuddered and disappeared again. Mike shouted at 
the poor unfortunate in the Jaguar, "Give it everything-now!" The top section 
rose majestically and just as the next section appeared, there was an 
enormous bang and the car's core plugs shot out.
Mike's next invention was a mechanical hair washing machine which didn't 
work either.
An extract from Doc. Slater's 'Gliding Notes' published in The Aeroplane 
issue of 2 January 1953 reports:
"Lasham's Christmas party was in the established tradition of the Surrey and 
Imperial Clubs, with that of the Army Gliding Club thrown in. The blackboard 
announced a full programme from 'Bar Opens' at 17.00 hours Saturday to 'Hot 
Dogs and Coffee' at 04.00 hours on Sunday. Highlights were the brewing of punch 
at 19.00, fancy dress contest at 19.15, and pantomime at 20.30. The panto entitled 
'Ikkle Rude Gliding Bed' started with an air minded young lady cycling towards the 
London Gliding Club. But the signpost, pointing to Dunstable one way and Lasham 
the other, had been wickedly reversed by two witches from the Surrey Club, and 
our fair gliding aspirant soon found herself in the Lasham kitchen. The fancy dress 
theme was 'What would you do if you couldn't glide?' There were at least two 
suicides, one of whom, a determined character, had a rope round his neck, a pistol 
to his head, a dagger in his breast and a brick tied round his middle. Tony Goodhart 
arrived as a skeleton with the notice saying 'No Gliding, No Living'. The winners of 
the most appropriate costume competition were Beryl and Geoffery Stephenson, 
the first man to soar across the English channel, who came over from Dunstable. 
They announced that they came as 'husband and wife', a subtle message which 
was not lost on other gliding spouses present!"
The speed of increase in both members and flying was beginning to be more 
than we could handle without permanent staff. Even our darling wives who 
cooked nourishing lunches and dinners for the hungry mob under the most 
appallingly, primitive conditions gave us their ultimatum, you men must help us 
or find a local cook or else... They only played that card once for immediately 
the Chairman, Hugo Trotter, announced that on the following Saturday roles 
would be reversed. Supper would be cooked by the men and the girls could 
wash up instead. He and Cliff Dowdall then set to work amid great secrecy and 
everyone wondered what feast would be set before us when we finished flying. 
As everyone rushed back to the clubhouse, the smell of the food was wonderful 
and we knew that it would be a meal to remember. It was! The potatoes were 
dyed red, the meat blue, the carrots green and the cabbage a dreadful mouse

--- PAGE 86 ---
92
A Glider Pilot Bold...
colour. Thereafter it was decreed that only women would be allowed to cook at 
Lasham, that was until 'Dandruff George' came along. We had divided the 
Committee responsibilities into two areas, each under its own Chairman: 'inside 
peri-track' and 'outside peri-track'. Finding keen, well qualified members to 
serve on the 'outside' Committee known as 'Lasham Living' was no problem but 
we realised that a very special person was required to take over the role of 
Resident Flying Instructor and help the 'inside' boys do their job more effectively.
Derek Piggott about to fly the replica Gayley

--- PAGE 87 ---
________________Chapter 13
Derek Piggott — our hero!
B
y 1954, the Army Club who had been flying at Lasham since 1951, 
agreed to combine their flying operations with us. By this time the Surrey 
and the Imperial College of Science and Technology Clubs had been 
joined by the Polish Air Force Association Gliding Club, whose members were 
a splendid public-spirited, hard working bunch of rugged individualists, and the 
Leighton Park Boys School of Reading gliding section who had built 
themselves a Slingsby T.21 two seater under the supervision of John Simpson. 
To make this amalgamation of fiercely independent clubs and people work, we 
realised that we would need a paragon as the resident Flying Instructor.
We found just the man in Alan Derek Piggott who at that time was still 
serving in the Royal Air Force acting as the Chief Instructor at the Detling 
Gliding School. When he finally retired from Lasham in 1989, an article written 
by me for the Lasham magazine said:
"OUR HERO! Back in the dark ages when we still enjoyed superb soaring 
summers and most of you, dear Readers, were not even born, I was lucky 
enough to do something which has since benefited countless thousands of my 
fellow human beings throughout the world." I met, admired, and finally 
persuaded Alan Derek Piggott to leave the Royal Air Force and join us.
My letter to him of 20 September 1953 said: "My dear Alan, With reference to 
our conversation at Farnborough, I have told our Committee that you might be 
interested in the position of Resident Flying Instructor of the Surrey Gliding Club. 
With this in mind, I am authorised by our Committee to ask you whether you will 
consider the following offer: That you come to us at a salary of not less than £700 
per year. That all your flying will be free but that you will have to pay for your own 
retrieving and aerotows. Time off, holidays etc, will be by arrangement. The club at 
the moment operates one Weihe, four Olympias, two two seaters and one Tutor. 
We have just tendered for two Tiger Moths. We are further looking for a fulltime 
aircraft cum MT ground engineer. The Club is also looking for a lady to operate the 
catering arrangements who will be paid two shillings an hour."
I blush on re-reading this letter for many reasons, some more obvious than 
others! When you think that Derek's final salary from us was probably not much 
more in real terms than the £700 we offered him thirty five years earlier, it 
makes you realise how financially shabbily the gliding movement rewards the 
very people who make it possible for us to enjoy our sport. No apologies for 
mentioning one of my hobby horses which, together with security of tenure, 
fund raising to be able to pay for our freehold when it comes, and democratic 
justice have been major factors in my life. But to go on about Derek, who 
changed his name when he joined us, but that's another story. No one can do 
adequate justice to the man. The stories he tells about his stunt flying in films 
such as Those Magnificent Men in their Flying Machines', 'Blue Max', 'Chitty

--- PAGE 88 ---
94 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
Chitty Bang Bang', 'Darling Lili' and numerous others will make the hairs on the 
back of your neck stand bolt upright! The only real way is for him to write the 
unexpurgated version of his life as a follow up to his autobiography 'Delta 
Papa'. When Derek joined us at the beginning of 1954 he brought Warren 
Storey, a superb glider mender with him; we found a cook and Lasham has 
never looked back. Without ADP we could not have built Lasham into what it is 
today. He was the engine and the fuel that made us go. His boundless energy, 
enthusiasm and flying perfection inspired us all to work for the common cause, 
help new and young members to learn and love our sport and always fly better, 
safer, higher and further. My friend Godfrey Smith in his Sunday Times column 
quoted Emerson the other day. Something like "Heroes are in danger of 
becoming bores to succeeding generations". That will never be true of Derek. 
For years to come pilots the world over will be able to boast that their instructor 
or their instructor's instructor was the great Derek Piggott. During his life Derek 
has been honoured by almost everyone: the Queen, the FAI, the Royal Aero 
Club, the BGA and countless other worthy bodies. He has won model aircraft 
awards, gliding awards, flying awards, filming awards and more besides, any 
one of which would have satisfied and delighted more ordinary mortals. His 
collection of diverse gongs is well worth seeing. (I am reminded of the story 
when King George V who after having presented Billy Bishop, the first world 
war Canadian fighter ace with first the Military Cross, then the Distinguished 
Service Order followed by the Victoria Cross said "Next time you come here 
Bishop, I will have to make you an Archbishop!"). Yet the mark of the man is 
that he is as unassuming and modest now as he was all those years ago when 
he first came to us. His quite remarkable enthusiasm when confronted by a 
new pupil and his boyish love affair with all things flying and other people's 
flying is as obvious now as it was when I first met him. We, the Surrey Club and 
its real successor, the Lasham Gliding Society, have been fantastically lucky in 
our choice of chief instructors. First Lome Welch who licked us into shape after 
the war at Redhill and set the course and direction of the best in British Gliding, 
then Derek Piggott, surely the outstanding flying instructor of all time, followed 
by Terry Joint and finally today Graham MacAndrew.
Derek has now retired. He has done us proud above and well beyond the 
call of duty. The Concise Oxford Dictionary defines the 'Hero' thus: "A man of 
superhuman qualities favoured by the Gods, a demigod, illustrious warrior".
We dined him out in style at Lasham and the menu serves as a record of 
some of his achievements. His very talented son Bobby wrote a song at very 
short notice which followed his father's speech:

--- PAGE 89 ---
Chapter Thirteen - Derek Piggott - our hero!
He'cf like to teach the world to fly in perfect harmony
He'd like to soar in thermals strong, and keep birds company
In loops and stalls and climbing turns he'd lead them through the sky
In anything that flaps or spins, he'd teach the world to fly
From model planes to Optica it matters not to him
But height's important over sea, he doesn't like to swim
On printed page or celluloid he's famous for his grin
But we remember how he looked in Daisy or in Min
If you've a triplane or a Spad he'll fly it through a bridge
An airship or a flying boat he'll put it in a ditch
He'd like to teach the world to glide, despite the weather here
You'll hear him in the darkest hour, I think it's going to clear.
The spoof telegrams allegedly sent to him were read out and were greeted with 
much laughter:
"Darling Derek, I didn't really fancy you until you put my dress on and
then, Wow!"
Signed, Sarah Miles, leading actress, 'Magnificent Men and their Flying
Machines.
"Derek, when I got the leading role in the film, I positively refused to fly in that 
dangerous airship. Bless you Derek for taking my place and thus saving my 
life. You are the real hero and expert of 'Chitty Chitty Bang Bang'." 
Signed, Richard Chamberlain, Actor.
"Cobber, thanks for teaching me to fly. I am glad you did not take up golf, 
I reckon you would have beaten me every time." 
Signed, Greg Norman, Golfer.
"Piggott, I will always be in your debt. But for you most glider pilots 
would never have heard of me. Best regards." 
Signed, Sir George Cayley, dead Inventor.
"Signer Piggott, Thank God you and I were not alive at the same period 
of history, no one would have heard of me." 
Signed, Giovanni Cassanova, dead roue.
"Derek Piggott, gliding instructor extraordinary. Thanks a million for what 
you have done for all of us." 
Signed, Glider pilots the world over.

--- PAGE 90 ---
THE LASH AM GLIDING SOCIETY
The Dinner and Ounce for DfcREK PICC3TT 
THE MENU
Baked Salmon
Gammon Ham
Roast Beef
Coronation Chicken
Green Salad 
Colaifaw
Tomato Sat ad 
Rice Salad
Kidney deans and Peppers 
Russian Saind
Roll and Butter*
Fre*h Fruit Satud in Mermguft Nest
Peach and Brandy Gaieeu
Strawberry Gateau
Coffee and After Dinner Mint;;
THE SPEECHES
The Master of Cwwnonle* - Hi* Servitude Samuel Mummery 
8 A 
The Plaudftor - HI* Emfnence Cri-*Walter Kahn 
The H»ro of th* Hour - the ONLY Der-ek Piggotl 
The laat word - His Worship the Chairman of LG5, the Friendly 
Society, Anthony Mattin
THE BAND
Andy Dickens and the 'Jump, Jive and Wall' Combo 
THE ATTIRg
Lounge Suits and/or Dinner Jacket*
Dancing Shoes, Waoltei and Wellies for th* Gentlemen
Anything and Wellies for the Ladles
Trailers at aim Sunday 16th April 1»*9
RICHMOND COLLEGE C C 
READING UNIVERSITY G C 
ESSO C C
BOOKS by OEREK PICGOTT
Gliding {19581
Beginning Gilding (1975)
Understanding Gliding (1977)
Sub Gravity Sensations and Gliding Accidents (1977)
Delta Papa 11977)
Going Solo (1978)
Understanding Weather (19381 
Flying
MOVIES- Pilot and Advisar
Those Magnificent Man and their Flying Machines
The Blue Max
Darling Lili
The Red Baron
Villa Rides
You Can't Win Them At!
Chitty Chitty Bang Bang
Guns tn the Heather
Chimpmates Airborne
Sir George Cayley, On« of Those Magnificent Men
The BBC TV Series "Wings"
Skywards
Slipstream
Agatha, The BBC Hartley Trilogy, a Martini TV Advert, etc, etc
The Queen's Commendation for Services to ATC Gilding 1953
The Royal Aero Club Bronze Medal 1963
The BCA Diploma for Services to Gliding 1972
Atr League of the British Empire Scott r~arnie Medal fur Air
Education 1972
The Royal Aero Club Diploma For Services to Gliding 1987 
A Member of the British Empire (MBE) for Services to Gliding 1987
o
(X

--- PAGE 91 ---
Chapter Thirteen - Derek Piggott - our hero!
97

--- PAGE 92 ---
Chapter 14
Retrieves and other stories
I
n those carefree days of the late '40s and '50s before closed circuit tasks 
became the norm as the result of higher performance gliders which had 
better penetration and therefore opened the way to effective crosswind and 
into wind flying, downwind dashes were the tasks undertaken by pilots. In order 
to minimise the time delay before the glider was brought back to base so that 
other pilots could fly, the vital requirement of an efficient crew was all important. 
To get the best volunteers, pilots were graded by their largesse cries of "Bloggs 
is tops, he always buys his crew a four course meal on the way back" or "don't 
crew for him, he's a mean..., if you're lucky he might stop for fish and chips" 
were quite normal. 'UCCs'utterly committed crews, a term coined for Judy and 
Brian Slade, one of the very best, honed by Nick Goodhart, polished by Rika 
Harwood and then inherited by me, were much sought after and worth their 
weight in gold. When Don Snodgrass, the Chairman of the Southdown Club 
and a committed bachelor suddenly announced his engagement we asked 
why. "Damn it, that woman can take corners going round on three wheels when 
towing and makes fantastic jam butties as well. I can't let her escape".
During competitions the pilot was allowed to return to base for another 
attempt at the task so it was vital that the crew pick him up as soon as possible 
after landing and rush back at breakneck speed. Rally drivers do not have 
better training than we provided. Before two way radio communication was 
available in gliders various ploys were used by pilots and crews. As soon as the 
pilot had set off on the task, the crews would follow and depending on the day 
and length of task would telephone back to base making a reverse charge call 
to Control naming their pilot. If nothing had been heard, Control would refuse 
to accept the charge on the grounds that the named person was not available. 
When a landing message was finally 'in house' the call was accepted and only 
then would the crew have to pay for the call. On a good day each crew of the 
fifty plus gliders taking part might well make ten such calls each and the 
telephone people got heartily sick of our trick though they never stopped it. It 
was also very important for the pilot after landing to find a telephone as quickly 
as possible. Here fitness and stamina were all important as you might have to 
run some distance to find one. Skilled, clever pilots selected their landing fields 
not only on size and surface but also in close proximity to a pub, a large country 
house, a nudist colony (before the 1947 Nationals we had marked all of them 
on our maps) or at least a farmhouse with telegraph wires going to it.
During one Comps, Ted Stark made a total bog of things and landed only a 
few miles from the start. The nearest house was across five fields and he set off 
at high speed. Eventually he reached the last fence and entered the large 
garden of the house when he saw a deck chair with someone sitting on it. "Have 
you got a telephone, can I use it?" he shouted whereupon a totally naked nubile

--- PAGE 93 ---
100 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
young thing leapt up and clutching a large straw hat to her shapely family seat, 
ran for her life towards the house hotly pursued by a breathless Ted shouting 
"Stop, I only want to use your phone!". She made the house before him and 
slammed the door in his face. He found a telephone in the village a mile away 
and by the time his crew found him, he had given up the unequal struggle and 
after a number of pints of ale lost all interest in flying again that day.
David Ince's wife, Anne, had persuaded her employer Hulton Press to buy the 
new prototype Slingsby two seater on condition that the type be called The Eagle, 
the name of their latest children's magazine. A small number of us were invited 
to fly it providing we were willing to give demonstrations up and down the country. 
On one of these John Williamson flying with Jim Bunting was forced to land in an 
unsuitable field in the middle of a large wood. Normally when you landed in a field 
not in sight of the road, the trick was to tie a piece of coloured cloth to a tree so 
that the crew would spot it as they reached the landing field. Unfortunately John 
Willie had forgotten this vital equipment so Jim being ever resourceful climbed a 
large tree by the side of the road which he reckoned would give him a good view 
of the oncoming traffic. Suddenly the car and trailer came along at high speed 
and in an attempt to attract their attention, he threw the only thing to hand which 
was their 'flying food', namely a bunch of bananas. The car accelerated and was 
soon out of sight. When, four hours later, pilots and crew finally met up, John 
Willie demanded to know why they had not stopped. "Hell's teeth, what would 
you have done if a bunch of bananas hit the front of your car and up in a tree you 
saw a large brown object jumping up and down?" was the classic reply.
Finding your glider is one thing, finding your pilot is something else as a 
Cambridge club crew discovered. Stuart Waller had completed his Silver 'C' 
distance by landing on the disused airfield at Ludham which is surrounded by 
the Norfolk Broads. They arrived at 11 o'clock at night and spent the next hour 
searching for the Slingsby Prefect and its pilot. Much shouting and flashing the 
headlights on and off failed to attract their man, when they read the notice in the 
cockpit which said that Stuart was waiting for them in the local public house. To 
save time, they de-rigged the glider and in a typical Cambridge bodge managed 
to stow it into the Skylark trailer they had brought with them. Mine host of The 
Baker's Arms' did not enjoy being woken up at lam and told them that when the 
pub closed their man had gone to a bed and breakfast establishment further 
down the road. "Go away, he's not here, try the local policeman, his house is just 
down the road" was the irate landlady's instruction shouted to them from a first 
floor window. In the meantime someone telephoned the police reporting three 
scruffy suspicious characters seen knocking on doors in the village. Not only did 
the local bobby appear, but so did two squad cars and a motorcycle cop all of 
whom eventually believed their story that they were not robbers but merely 
looking for their pilot. The Law was not impressed, nor were the crew and as it 
was now after 2 o'clock, they asked the local policeman to tell the missing pilot 
that he could walk home! When Stuart appeared back in Cambridge that 
afternoon, he explained that when he was thrown out of the pub at midnight, he 
found the Church door open, went inside and duly fell asleep.

--- PAGE 94 ---
Chapter Fourteen — Retrieves and other stories
The variety of landing out stories is endless and every pilot can tell 
entertaining and some not so entertaining ones of his own. The subject deserves 
its own book, so someone ought to start collecting now! Three very different ones 
prove that a rich vein is waiting to be mined. Strange story Robin was on a cross- 
country flight when he found himself rather low over what had been an airfield but 
was now the site of a large motor car factory. Below him he saw a car being 
driven round and round a test track and wondered whether the activity might 
trigger off a nice friendly bubble of warm rising air. The factory makes Japanese 
cars and the thermal did not materialise. Maybe, he thought, it will be a long flat 
one instead of a nice vertical one! Very soon he had to land and found some 
smooth grass near the old runway. He was hardly out of the cockpit when three 
cars roared up, lots of men jumped out and surrounded him. They demanded his 
cameras, radios and any other recording devices they insisted he had hidden in 
his aeroplane. Robin tried to explain, "I'm a glider, no vertical wind, please be 
careful do not walk on my wings..." but they did not seem to care. Suddenly a 
black hood was put over his head, he was pushed into a car and driven off. They 
took him to a room which had no windows and removed the hood. It was only 
when they started a fierce interrogation demanding to know who he was working 
for, what had he seen, had he already passed information on to an accomplice, 
that Robin realised what it was all about. It took him over half an hour to persuade 
them that his story was true and clinched it by telling them that when his crew 
came to fetch him, they would see that his car towing the trailer was one of theirs.
"Hello, Hello, what's this, engine fell out, did it?" When the arm of the law 
arrives at a landing site you soon discover whether you have 'Mr Nice' or 'Mr 
Nasty'. Some coppers can be very aggressive, which is not really surprising 
if they have been out in the fresh air on their bicycles looking for you. But the 
new breed, like Sergeant John Young of the Newbury Hermitage cop shop, 
who ride around on 1000cc motorbike monsters should be all sweetness and 
light. Bernard Fitchett, at one stage one of our top young contenders for 
World Gold, landed in a field near Newbury. He heard the roar of a powerful 
BMW and soon after saw a figure approaching. Dressed in black leather, 
black gloves and a black helmet with the visor down over the eyes, the 
policeman brought out a notebook and pencil and demanded "Name, 
address, age, occupation, married or single...", Bernard had never been 
asked such searching questions and the more agitated he became, the 
worse his speech impediment became which the policeman totally ignored. 
Just as poor Bernard was close to tears, he was asked whether he had 
contacted the farmer to apologise for landing unannounced in his field. "Not 
yet, Officer-l haven't had time, but I will, I promise". "You better laddie, I might 
want to land here meself and with that lifted his visor. He had been conned 
beautifully by John, a gliding friend he had failed to recognise as we tend not 
to see each other in our working gear!
Landing out can be profitable if you know what you are doing. Frank, who 
has stopped using his Rolls Royce as his retrieve vehicle, landed one day near 
a garage. After telephoning back to base, he wandered round aimlessly when

--- PAGE 95 ---
102 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
he spotted a tree trunk lying behind the garage. Into the garage goes our Frank 
and starts talking to the owner nonchalantly asking why the tree was lying there. 
The owner explained that the tree used to stand behind the garage and when 
he wanted more room he had it cut down. He was going to move it one day 
when he had time. Frank, who has a large timber company and had recognised 
the wood, offered to take it away as a favour. The garage owner wouldn't hear 
of it and insisted that he pay Frank for his trouble. As Frank later admitted-the 
£25 was a bonus but that tree trunk paid for all his gliding that year!
You will hear stories about cows licking, eating, kicking, jumping over and 
running round gliders. Bulls also often get a mention but one of the best must 
be the Chris Rollings, of Booker and BGA fame, and Mike Carlton's epic of 
wager and gluttony. The whole sordid story entitled 'A load of Bull' appeared in 
the February 1981 issue of Sailplane and Gliding.
Chris on landing in a field had problems with a large brown and white bull 
which had decided to sample a delicious diet of wood and fabric. Armed with a 
long stick, he fought hard to deprive the beast of his feast. When his crew who, 
included Mike Carlton, finally arrived on the scene, the talk was not about the 
flight but rather about the superb quality of Aberdeen Angus steaks. One thing 
soon led to another and in no time it was "You couldn't eat a bull that size." "Bet 
I could." "How long would it take you?" "I'll eat it in a year." "Eat it raw? Bet you 
couldn't." "Bet I could-in less than a year, and raw." Whether the bet was won 
or lost, history does not relate. Perhaps we must wait for Chris Rollings's 
unexpurgated autobiography to find out.
When racing tasks were introduced it was decided to change the take-off 
order for pilots from the glider competition number sequence to a pilot selected 
take-off time order. Because you set off as soon as you could after your launch 
it was important to gauge the optimum time of launch depending on weather 
conditions. The met men were in great demand and we hung on their every word 
of wisdom. Immediately after briefing a large board was set up outside the 
briefing tent; it had the minutes of the day painted on it, arranged in lines with 
each minute having its own box complete with a nail. Pilots were issued with 
discs bearing their competition number and in the selected order of the day would 
select their time of takeoff by hanging their disc in the appropriate box. The 
pundits played the game relentlessly; if they were at the end of the selection list, 
they would take a time either well before or long after the main body of 
competitors, then very obviously be seen to talk earnestly to the met man, return 
to the board and change their disc yet again. This always had a greatly unsettling 
effect on the lesser mortals who would change their discs and place them nearer 
the great men who would then seize the vacated slot nearer their ideal take-off 
time! The game sometimes lasted for over an hour, especially if the weather was 
playing up. If the met men revised their forecast, bedlam ensued. On one such 
occasion, as Rika Harwood who was standing in front of the board, disc poised, 
ready to strike, the mob surged forward and pinned her ample bosom to the nails. 
Flying that day was delayed as removing Rika resulted in half the nails falling out 
and after repairing the board, all the pilots had to start all over again.

--- PAGE 96 ---
Chapter Fourteen - Retrieves and other stories____ _______________103
Groups of friends forming themselves into small syndicates to own a glider 
was becoming increasingly popular, but early attempts at arranging a fair rota 
system for flying proved difficult for what was generally a group of rugged 
individualists. Syndication was said to be more difficult than marriage and often 
blows were exchanged. In one at Portmoak, things became so fraught that they 
ended in the Law Courts when one partner welded the doors of the trailer 
together to stop the other one flying! Another case concerned a syndicate of 
Royal Air Force officers of which David Innes was a partner, members of the 
RAFGSA Moonrakers gliding club based at RAF Upavon, a somewhat quaint 
though very attractive pre-First World War airfield. They owned an SHK 
sailplane which had a V tail consisting of two short 'wings'; they found that one 
partner had removed one of the tailplanes, taken it to the guardroom of their 
base and ordered the corporal of the guard to lock it in a cell. He further gave 
the order that no one other than himself was authorised to take it out. When 
Dimitri Zotov, one the partners found their vital bit, he had to beg the Orderly 
Officer of the day to countermand the instruction. To avoid a similar thing 
happening again, they decided to move the glider to another site but as the 
errant partner was still on the airfield they faced the problem of carrying out the 
plan without attracting his attention. They found a tug pilot willing to put his 
career on the line by sneaking out at a very low level until hidden behind the far 
hills. The tug and glider combination then flew a very large 