circle to a position 
east of Upavon until they landed at Thruxton airfield. There Ralph Jones kindly 
agreed to hide the SHK in his hangar close by. They then flew at this site until 
the miscreant was very firmly removed from the Air Force and proximity to their 
machine. Dimitri Zotov hit the National Newspapers some time later, one 
headline read: 'White Russian New Zealander Royal Air Force pilot flies German 
glider from Scotland to Ireland!" You can't get more multi-national than that! 
Now, of course, glider pilots are much more civilised and life is more orderly.

--- PAGE 97 ---
Chapter 15
Pont and Angers
I
n 1951 the French Air Force invited the Royal Air Force Gliding and Soaring 
Association to send two pilots to fly at their National Centre at Pont St 
Vincent near Nancy in north east France. In spite of my past 
misdemeanours, Air Commodore Chris Paul nominated me and a strange 
young doctor called Brennig James who had recently completed his National 
Service in the RAF. The stories about this near genius and you know what 
some geniuses are-are legion. To his credit is the fact that he started the 
Thames Valley Gliding Club at Booker airfield near High Wycombe which then 
was the home of the 'Silver Wings' British Airways Gliding Club created by 
Peter Hearne, Peter Ross, Roger Neave and others and to-day forms part of 
the progressive Booker Gliding Club. He has excelled as a soaring pilot, having 
completed more flights of over 750km than any other British pilot to date. 
Always full of energy and sometimes crazy ideas he does cause even strong 
men to wilt and hide in corners when he appears. There is only space for two 
Brennig stories here, more's the pity. He always arrived at Championships 
without a crew and press ganged any unsuspecting bystander to work for him. 
During one contest he was returning to Lasham after a cross-country flight and 
was driving along the North Circular Road in London.
Stopped at some traffic lights, some yobs in a car drew up alongside and in 
next to no time words were exchanged. When the lights turned to green, Brennig, 
always highly competitive, put his foot hard down on the accelerator determined 
to show them who was the boss. Some three miles later a car flagged him down 
and the driver shouted "Mate, something fell out of your box back there". When 
Brennig and crew stopped and looked into the trailer they found the fuselage 
missing. As the North Circular Road is dual carriageway, the journey back to find 
the fuselage was all of five miles. Then to his relief they found the fuselage 
leaning up against a garden wall totally undamaged. It could only happen to him. 
The other story is quite sad in its way. At Pont St Vincent he was introduced 
to the French lavatory. For the uninitiated this consists of a hole in the floor with 
two bars let into the walls on either side at knee height designed to help take the 
strain of crouching in the very undignified position required. This puzzled the dear 
boy until we explained that he was supposed to stand on them which he reported 
as being very difficult. When, many years later he and David Kent took a glider 
to Nepal hoping to fly over Everest, he was amazed to find the lavatory in his 
hotel room was of the French variety with the added refinement of a proper loo 
seat flush with the floor. Not for nothing is he a member of Mensa and he rose to 
the challenge by sitting on the seat with his legs stretched out. When he pulled 
the chain, water shot out from under him and flooded his bathroom. The 
hotelkeeper explained that a European sales representative, a latter day Thomas 
Crapper, holder of the Royal Warrant, the Order of the Green Cloth, sanitary ware

--- PAGE 98 ---
106 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
suppliers to her Majesty Queen Victoria, had recently sold them this western 
refinement which they had just fitted in time for Mr. James's visit. Unfortunately 
they had not received any instructions and their man had obviously thought that 
the device should be let into the floor with the seat flush with it.
Pont was great fun. The site is a plateau on a hill but the piste was slightly 
disconcerting as scattered about in it were small concrete slabs proclaiming 
'iciest mort Monsieur...' The sparse accommodation was in a blockhouse let 
into the rocks overlooking the valley towards Germany which had been built in 
the eighteenth century and did not appear to have been touched since. That 
year the weather was not kind and only flights of one hundred kilometres were 
possible. We went back there the following year and found the Brits were still 
regarded with some awe. Nick Goodhart had visited Pont in May 1951, 
borrowed a glider, and not having a map he unwrapped his sandwiches, traced 
a few details on to the greaseproof wrapping paper and promptly covered the 
required three hundred kilometres to secure Gold 'C' No.9 followed later by 
becoming the first Brit to complete the coveted Diamond 'C'. Rear Admiral HCN 
Goodhart is a very remarkable man. A naval engineering officer who became a 
Fleet Air Arm pilot, passed the Empire 'lest Pilots School course, winner of the 
World Two seater Championships flying a Slingsby Eagle in 1956, a contestant 
in numerous World Contests and winner of the American Soaring Contest. His 
record breaking flight during a National Championship from Lasham to 
Portmoak in Scotland still has not been equalled. He invented the mirror 
landing system for aircraft carriers and was the moving spirit and major force 
in the design and building of 'Sigma', the variable geometry very high 
performance sailplane. He then turned his considerable skills to the problems 
of man powered flight, designed and built a huge machine which regretfully 
suffered a mishap in its hangar before full tests could be carried out.
Every morning the 'Chef would allocate a glider to each pilot and when the 
great day came he issued his orders. "Petit Distance pour Brevet D (the Silver 
'C' fifty kilometre requirement) Messieurs..., Le Grand Distance pour Brevet E 
(the Gold 'C' distance) Messieurs... and Le Grand Distance avec But Fixe 
(Gold distance with a landing at a nominated goal) pour..."
Five of us, including Brennig, completed the 325km goal flight to Bourges 
in fine fettle. Then my trouble started. The next Gold 'C' number of the British 
Register was 10 and as I had landed first I extracted a promise from Brennig 
that it would be mine. Gliding is a very competitive sport and I just knew that 
we were both as devious as each other so I telephoned the BGA Office to stake 
my claim without Brennig knowing. For good measure I also sent off a postcard 
just in case! To add insult to injury, that night he and I had to share a single bed. 
Quite an experience, one which I would not wish on my worst enemy. The next 
morning the French arranged a twin tow back to Pont. Darling Brennig tried 
every trick to make me release my rope on the way home in the hope that he 
would be able to get back to London before me. No chance! I was determined 
to stay on, come hell or high water.

--- PAGE 99 ---
Chapter Fifteen - Pont and Angers____________________________107
He had to return by train as 'unfortunately' I had no spare room in my car. 
Our journey back was horrendous, the poor Vanguard had never been driven 
so hard. My wife threatened divorce and worse in an effort to get me to reduce 
speed; I promised ever loving devotion, diamonds, a new kitchen and anything 
else that came to mind and kept going. Just as Alex, Lady Kinloch, the EGA 
Secretary, handed me the coveted No. 10 badge, the door was nearly torn off 
its hinges as Brennig shot in shouting 'No. 10 is mine'. When he saw us 
standing there, his face was an absolute picture.
In the sixties the number of British pilots who entered what the French called 
'Coupe d'Europe de Vol a Voile, 8 Jours d'Angers' which we immediately 
renamed The Eight Days of Danger' increased substantially. Being French, the 
competition lasted fifteen days and always started the day after their very special 
'Bastille Day' holiday. They are very keen to remember when they stormed the 
great fortress in Paris at the start of their eighteenth century revolution and so 
really worked on the Opening Party so that the many pilots from all over Europe 
should not be left in any doubt of their ability to create mayhem in pint pots. 
Angers, being in the Anjou wine area of France, provided numerous large barrels 
of its delectable wine which certainly helped things along. A long trench was dug, 
filled with charcoal, which was fanned with typical French panache by a parked 
Stampe tug aircraft, engine running, which was obviously the French equivalent 
of a' punka wallah'. All ranks were then issued with metal rods, which had served 
and probably would again as vital parts of some unknown flying machine. Tubs 
full of onions, tomatoes, peppers and cubes of meat were provided and when 
ready you placed your homemade Kebab over the trench and waited until the 
meat was cooked to your satisfaction. At this point certain foreign pilots who had 
not been taught to play cricket at school and to whom the concept of fair play was 
entirely alien came into their own and we found them adept at pinching our 
skewers which saved them effort and valuable drinking time. On our second visit, 
we remembered the ploy and brought some really hot chillies with us from the UK 
which we used to spike our special 'treat' and then waited to see the results, 
which were very gratifying. Until then, at British National Championships, the 
Director Ann Welch invariably held back the vital task details until halfway through 
the briefing when she would hold up a folded cardboard folder and in great 
dramatic fashion, let it fall open so that the pilots could see the task set. We were 
delighted that at Angers, the Competition director, Monsieur Herson, who was 
called le Patron' by one and all, wrote all the details on the hangar door as soon 
as possible giving full details of the closed circuit tasks including leg distances, 
headings and other vital information. It thus gave you ample time to work on your 
maps and when, usually some two hours later, the briefing started, pilots could 
give their total attention to what was being said. We thought it was a far better 
system than the one to which we were subjected at home, said so when we 
returned and luckily the point was taken.
For crews, Angers was sheer bliss. Take-offs were generally after lunch at 
about Ipm and most finishers came home by six. The crews would launch their

--- PAGE 100 ---
108
A Glider Pilot Bold...
pilot, go shopping or sight seeing and then sit in the swimming pool in the town 
until their pilot called 'final glide' so that the crew had time to return to the airfield 
at Avrille. Herson loved his part of France and wanted all of us to see the 
countryside so deliberately set one task which resulted in out landings. On one 
occasion as we returned with my glider safely stowed in its box, we came across 
Humphrey Dimock's trailer sitting by the side of the road with no car in sight. As 
we walked up to investigate, we heard a strange noise coming from the front. 
When we opened the door, the sight was hilarious. There was 'Bip Bip' or' 
Dimdog' as he was known in the Royal Navy sitting on a make shift loo. When 
we pointed out the railway bye-law about waiting until the train had left the 
station, he replied, "Ah yes, but that only applies in the U.K.!" The 'eight days' 
were always very enjoyable but keenly fought contests which a number of 
countries used as their pre-world training and warm up contest. By the end of the 
sixties the contest had become the 'de facto' European Championships and in 
1973 eighty pilots and gliders from ten different countries competed in the event.
The Stcmme S.10, the last glider to carry my competition number

--- PAGE 101 ---
Chapter 16
The Battle for Lasham
^^he story of the Battle for Lasham should never be forgotten as it does prove 
I that if your cause is Right, you can see off Might! Furthermore I feel it is 
I worth airing my personal opinions as a warning for future generations who 
might be engaged in a similar endeavour. Great Britain is, of course, the best 
country in the world. We regard ourselves as highly civilised, justly proud of our 
method of governing ourselves and indeed have recommended our Parliamentary 
system to any and all other nations who care to listen. We also felt very safe in our 
island fortress, the English Channel we regarded as our moat with 'them over 
there' being strange garlic eating humans to be kept at arms length. The famous 
National newspaper headline which proclaimed in large letters "Fog in the 
Channel, Continent cut off' says it all. We do not have a written Constitution but 
sometimes do wonder whether Abraham Lincoln's edict of "Government of the 
people, by the people, and for the people" is uppermost in the minds of some of 
the elected and non-elected officials who control our destiny.
Until a popular television series called 'Yes, Minister' appeared it was 
almost certainly true that The Great British Public' had no idea of how 
decisions were made and then carried out. It was claimed that Mrs Thatcher, 
the Prime Minister at the time, found the programme compulsive viewing 
though it is doubtful whether some senior members of the Civil Service were 
entirely enthralled by the programme's expose of their methods.
It was also vital to learn and interpret 'Government speak'. When the 
multitude of civil servants signed their letters with the usual "I remain Sir, Your 
obedient Servant" you knew it was normal protocol, but when they started with 
"With great respect", you knew that it meant the exact opposite. Woe betide 
you if you received a letter which contained both of these phrases as it always 
rang warning bells that the letter was a real stinker. In our battle to persuade 
first His Majesty's and then Her Majesty's Government to grant us a lease, we 
built up quite a collection of them.
Until we started the Battle for Lasham in the early nineteen fifties, we were 
naive and wanted to believe that Ministers and their Civil Servants always 
spoke the truth, wanted the best for all of us and above all were ever 
approachable. Like children we saw the political world through rose-coloured 
spectacles. Oh Boy! Were we wrong.
When the Surrey Gliding Club moved to Lasham in August 1951, we were 
granted a month's security of tenure by the Air Ministry, then the 'owner' of the 
airfield. This was obviously totally inadequate and after trying to have the term 
extended without any success, Ann Welch and Hugo Trotter finally demanded 
and were granted an interview with a senior official. They asked for a twenty 
year lease and explained that we had great plans for the future, had been asked 
to hold the National Gliding Championship at the site which could only be 
undertaken if we had proper security of tenure. The Ministry of Transport and

--- PAGE 102 ---
110 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
Civil Aviation agreed to sponsor our application but after endless delays the Air 
Ministry stated that no decision could be made. Repeated attempts to change 
the official minds over the next two years got us precisely nowhere. When you 
are confronted by a brick wall, never forget that you can go round it, over it or 
under it. Furthermore the large number of spiders which had spun their webs in 
great profusion in the tatty wartime buildings we occupied at Lasham were a 
constant reminder of the Robert the Bruce dictum 'Try, try and try again!'
At the Royal Aero Club I had met Squadron Leader (later Air Marshal Sir 
Peter) Horsley who with Commander Mike Parker was an equerry to his Royal 
Highness The Duke of Edinburgh. Peter Horsley was the younger brother of 
Terence who had not only been a pioneering glider pilot but also the Editor of 
a National Newspaper in the Kemsley group who had persuaded his employer 
Lord Kemsley to set up The Kemsley Trust' which financed most gliding clubs 
in the U.K. after the war. Over the following months I left lots of gliding literature 
at Buckingham Palace and was able to discuss our lack of security of tenure 
problem with his Royal Highness. Not only did he offer to intervene on our 
behalf but also promised to visit the National Championship which we hoped to 
stage at Lasham in the near future. You can imagine our reaction when Philip 
Wills and I were called to Buckingham Palace to be shown a letter from the Air 
Ministry refusing a lease on the grounds of future possible defence 
requirements. That all encompassing official phrase was to haunt us for very 
many years! Now we decided that we had to 'go political' and therefore 'Who 
you know, not what you know' was the order of the day. During a visit to us at 
Lasham Peter Thornycroft, then Minister of Civil Aviation, said in his speech 
'Dig yourselves in and we will never be able to throw you out!' We took him at 
his word but it did not get us any closer to being granted a lease.
I noticed that there was a very active Labour member of Parliament called 
Frank Beswick. Having known a Flight Lieutenant Beswick in 2 Group during 
the war and hoping that he was the very same, I telephoned him at the House 
of Commons. Although he turned out to be another Flight Lieutenant Beswick, 
nevertheless he came up trumps, agreed to help and being a member of the 
Opposition party, liked nothing better than to tweak the Government's tail. 
Frank Beswick, later Lord Beswick, the Chairman of British Aerospace, 
arranged a meeting with the junior Minister at the Ministry of Civil Aviation and 
Hugo Totter, Frank Irving and I duly went along with him. To this day I still swear 
that the Minister was either extremely hard of hearing or very tired as for most 
of the meeting he appeared to have his eyes closed, his mind in neutral and 
his hearing organs switched to the 'off position. Surprisingly, however, six 
months later we were called to a meeting by the Chief Lands Officer at the Air 
Ministry. He informed us that perhaps a seven year lease could possibly be 
granted but that we would have to move all our gliders, the clubhouse and 
workshop to the North side of Beech Avenue, i.e. off the airfield.
Six months of masterly inactivity went by until May 1957 when in reply to 
questions asked by Sir Roger Conant and Frank Beswick in the House of 
Commons, Airey Neave, the Joint Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of

--- PAGE 103 ---
Chapter Sixteen - The Battle for Lasham________________________111
Transport and Civil Aviation spoke at some length about gliding. It will warm the 
cockles of your heart to read his speech -see 'Hansard' on 21 May 1957 at 
23.07 hours, pages 1187-1195. For us the vital paragraph of the speech was 
"...but my Honourable friend had mentioned Lasham. This is a Royal Air Force 
airfield and the position at the moment is that the Surrey Gliding Club has been 
offered a lease by the Air Ministry for quite a substantial period. Negotiations are 
now proceeding...". We hurriedly formed a Site Committee under the 
chairmanship of Tony Deane-Drummond who on his appointment to take 
command of the SAS unit then fighting in Malaya, handed over to Aylett Moore. 
It was charged to hurry things along and in September 1957 reported that the 
Air Ministry had decided to release the airfield but had cancelled our promised 
lease and stopped all further discussion. We now asked the British Gliding 
Association Council to designate us as The National Gliding Centre' in order to 
give us more clout. After an incredibly acrimonious Council meeting when a 
certain club north of the Thames objected on the grounds that it would lower its 
own status, the Council did eventually agree that Lasham could call itself 'A 
National Gliding Centre'. We did not think too much of that and indeed in my 
Appeal letter later on Lasham was described as The National and 
Commonwealth Gliding Centre'. If you are going to put the boot in, do it properly.
In October 1957 the Air Ministry asked all other Ministries whether they 
wanted Lasham but finding no takers had to offer it back to the previous owner. 
Some time earlier Commander Marten had fought and won a splendid battle with 
the Government for ever known as The Crichel Down Case' which confirmed 
that all lands compulsorily purchased during the war must first be offered back to 
the previous owner when no longer required by the State. As we had always 
worked hard at being good neighbours, supported the local activities, the Lasham 
tug of war team was in great demand as we invariably lost, our Darts team 
likewise-so Major Jervoise, the previous owner of the airfield land which is plum 
in the middle of his extended Herriard Park Estate, very readily agreed that on 
regaining the freehold he would grant us a twenty-one year lease.
Again nothing happened so we had another question asked in the House 
of Commons. Then things really started; we discovered that the Air Ministry 
was applying to the local Council for permission to re-zone Lasham for 
commercial use which, if granted, would have inflated the value dramatically. 
Naturally we set to and lobbied all the councillors on the Planning Committee 
and all other worthies in the area. The application was rejected, we had won 
that little skirmish. Then the negotiations over price and conditions between the 
Squire, the Air Ministry and the District Valuer resulted in deadlock and Major 
Jervoise refused to buy it back at the high price being demanded. Very sadly 
in May 1959 the Squire died but by his refusal to purchase, the Crichel Down 
judgement no longer applied and we therefore dreamt up another scheme.
We had created the Lasham Gliding Society for reasons explained elsewhere 
which, though legally incorporated on 24 December 1958, opened its door to the 
world on 1 June 1959. Philip Wills in his position as Chairman of the British 
Gliding Association and the Shaw Slingsby Trust was now asked to join the fray.

--- PAGE 104 ---
112 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
Philip had far more clout than we could ever hope to muster, his position in the 
City of London, his great work in the Air Transport Auxiliary followed by a stint in 
British European Airways, gave him access to most doors.
By November 1960, he reported that the Air Ministry had agreed to sell us the 
freehold of the whole of Lasham airfield for £70,000 but that ICFC (Industrial and 
Commercial Finance Corporation) decided that it was only worth £50,000 and 
would therefore only grant us a mortgage of £25,000 and we would have to find 
the rest ourselves. The Air Ministry gave us a month to come up with the money 
but categorically refused to discuss the price question. I immediately launched 
the Appeal Fund and soon collected £17,000 from our members. However, the 
deadline passed, ICFC withdrew their promise of funds and with our tails 
between our legs it was a question of 'back to the drawing board'. In the 
meantime the first committee and the secretariat of the Lasham Gliding Society 
had, for various reasons, wound themselves into a small hole and we all decided 
that it was time for a change. We felt that the new Chairman should not be a 
member of the old Surrey 'Gang' but be acceptable to the outgoing Committee. 
We settled on David Carrow who I had first met in Cambridge in 1948 and who 
had married Barbara, a Surrey member, which we felt made him 'one of us'. We 
persuaded Philip Wills to wave his old school tie at his fellow Old Harrovian, tell 
him that it was of national importance that he take the job and thankfully for 
Lasham he did. History repeated itself many years later when the same ploy was 
successfully used to persuade David to take on the Vice Chairmanship of the 
BGA. He had won the Aeronautics Prize at Cambridge, then worked at the Royal 
Aircraft Establishment Farnborough before joining Lloyd's and becoming a 
formidable insurance broker. He had also been awarded the Distinguished Flying 
Cross while a navigator during the war. He brought to the table a keen brain, a 
fresh outlook to our problem and above all a tremendous keenness to succeed. 
He and I now started on a never ending round of meetings to try and break the 
deadlock. Most of the time it felt as if we were running up the down escalator on 
the underground. There was a dance popular at the time called The Hokey 
Cokey', you put your left foot in, you pull your left foot out, you put your right foot 
in and shake it all about... which described the scene very adequately. They 
would not sell us the airfield so we were going hell for leather for a long lease. 
The Ministry people would call meetings at which they made sure that we were 
always outnumbered and during which various ludicrous reasons would be given 
to explain why they could not grant us a lease.
Two of these particularly spring to mind to show the length officialdom was 
prepared to go although they must surely have thought things through 
beforehand. Mustn't they? The first was a classic as they made the mistake, 
never thereafter repeated, of sending us an agenda which gave us ample 
warning of what was to come. On the south side of the airfield, the Radio 
Department of RAE who came to Lasham in about 1953, the same time as Dan 
Air the independent charter airline had established their servicing unit in the 
former Army Club hangar, had established a small enclave round the old 
control tower. They had recently built an impressive array of aerials some of

--- PAGE 105 ---
Chapter Sixteen - The Battle for Lasham________________________113
which were buried in the ground. As these were allegedly so secret and the 
work of such vital importance, they said that we could not possibly be allowed 
to operate gliders within miles of them. An agenda item gave enough clues to 
take prompt action. We rushed Dr Ken Machin, then the Chairman of the 
Cambridge University Gliding Club, but more importantly one of the most 
eminent radio and radar scientists of his day, to Lasham before the meeting for 
an 'on-site' inspection and evaluation of the endeavour. The meeting started in 
the usual way, three of us, five of them. "You cannot have a lease because 
National Security etc etc." But then our 'ringer' demolished all the arguments 
and proved to them that not only had they got their sums wrong but also the 
whole of the aerial system was quite useless! Totally stunned, complete 
collapse of stout party and the Chairman ended the meeting very smartly.
Another meeting was equally sad though in its own way very funny. The 
Group Captain commanding Farnborough was wheeled up with six others and 
had succeeded in wearing David Carrow down with a crazy idea but would not 
listen to his counter argument at all. I arrived late as I had been doing battle with 
some Cubans at their Embassy, real work for David and me had to go on in spite 
of Lasham which the civil servants realised and played for all they were worth. 
The faces of the people in the room clearly showed 'stalemate in pint pots'. After 
a brief resume and on hearing that the latest reason for refusing us a lease was, 
as the Group Captain explained, in the event of his aircraft suffering radio failure, 
he would have to instruct them to overfly Lasham on their return to Farnborough. 
At this point David and I looked at each other and burst out laughing. "Sir" I said, 
"if the aircraft has suffered radio failure, how will you talk to the pilot?" That too 
brought the meeting to an abrupt end and back they went to their drawing board.
Would you believe, then, that in May 1962, the Treasury Solicitor sent us a 
draft lease which, after careful examination, we found to be less than 
satisfactory. After yet more meetings we were at last able to clear all their 
various objections and finally on 29 August 1962 we were offered and signed 
the 'Heads of Agreement'. Victory at last we thought and I set to at once to raise 
additional funds which we would need to strip and reclad our hangar and build 
our clubhouse. But even at this late hour our friends thought up yet more 
devilment. On 28 September the Treasury Solicitor sent yet another letter, this 
time stating that as the Ministry's examination of the proposed western 
extension of the London Control Zone indicated a possible effect on all the areas 
involved, it was premature to complete negotiations with us. In view of this, the 
Ministry considered that there was no point in sending the linen and paper 
plans! On 1 August 1962 we had managed to arrange a meeting with the new 
Parliamentary Under secretary, a gentleman called Basil de Ferranti. Philip 
Wills, David Carrow and I duly presented ourselves at the House of Commons 
and no sooner had the meeting started than we realised that the two most senior 
Civil Servants were (to use a phrase which is now justly renowned having been 
used by the Head of the Civil Service during the infamous 'Spycatcher' trial) 
"being economical with the truth". In Cockney rhyming slang, telling 'Porkies' i.e. 
pork pies lies. The Minister angrily refuted our assertions and so, to prove our

--- PAGE 106 ---
114 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
point, we passed him the damning evidence in the forms of letters signed by the 
two which they had sent to us. He then made a few ill chosen remarks which he 
refused to retract before closing the meeting. Philip was horrified and left David 
and me to cool down. Being young and probably foolish, we decided to give de 
Ferranti an ultimatum, retract or we will give the story to the National Press. 
Luckily for us, the day before the deadline was due to expire, the Cuban missile 
crisis blew up and we realised that the Press would not be too interested in our 
tale of skull duggery. With hindsight, just as well, you should not really threaten 
to expose a Minister of the Crown, unless it is a good sex scandal or you are a 
member of the Opposition party. As history shows, the gentleman in question 
resigned from the Government soon afterwards, albeit without our help.
We then took counsel's opinion on the matter. Our eminent Queens 
Counsel stated in his twelve page document dated 1 November 1962 that we 
had a very strong case to press for a twenty one year lease and in his opinion 
no Civil Servant would wish to give evidence against us if we went to trial. Part 
of Paragraph 17 of his opinion is worth quoting in full. "...The political and moral 
facts are that the Society in establishing itself at Lasham has been carrying out 
the policy of the Ministry and has acted with the approval and encouragement 
of the Ministry. Their efforts to establish a gliding centre have been praised and 
publicised. If there had not been difficulties arising out of RAE's special and 
independent position, the Lease would have been granted long ago. An 
attempt by the Ministry to get out of granting the Lease now will surely be 
regarded, when the facts are known, as DISREPUTABLE AND AS A 
DEMONSTRATION OF POLITICAL OR DEPARTMENTAL MUDDLE AND 
INCOMPETENCE.,." He finished with, "I believe that the Ministry will be shy of 
publicity and that "political" action is therefore likely to be effective"
When we read it, it was champagne all round. Our tails went up like never 
before! We promptly fired off a letter to the Treasury Solicitor saying that unless 
a lease was forthcoming within a reasonable period of say fourteen days, we 
would take legal proceedings to establish our rights. That made us feel much 
better. Philip Wills then sent a blistering letter to the Minister which would have 
given any normal human being severe palpitations. The final meeting in this long 
running saga was held on 15 November 1962 and is very adequately reported in 
Philip Wills' book, Free as a Bird. Philip, David and I, together with Nick Goodhart 
who we brought along as our Air Traffic Guru, led for Lasham. With our two 
splendid heavyweight Conservative Members of Parliament, Colonel Freddie 
Gough, then Chairman of the Royal Aero Club, a veteran of the Amhem airborne 
landings and not a man to be trifled with, and our local MP, the forceful Joan 
Quennell, we berated Julian Amery, the Minister of Aviation, and demanded that 
he sign the lease forthwith. After the first hour he called for a short recess. The 
second hour was almost a rerun of all the meetings we had attended over the 
past few years, before the Minister said "Yes, maybe!". At that point Freddie 
Gough went ballistic, threatened to vote against the Government and insisted 'on 
action this day'. Yet another recess was called and on the return of the Ministerial 
party, Amery agreed to sign there and then provided that the report not yet

--- PAGE 107 ---
Chapter Sixteen - The Battle for Lasham
written, which he had just instructed the Head of Air Traffic Services to produce 
examining the effects of future possible requirements in the event of an 
expansion of Heathrow showed no conflict with our flying, was favourable.
Some months later when the dust had settled, he sent a sweet letter stating 
that the report showed that there would not be any such conflict! When Amery 
returned to his office later that day, he is reported as having told his Junior 
Minister that he had found dealing with Archbishop Makarios during the Cyprus 
Independence talks far easier than dealing with the those gliders!
It was an historic battle, well worth winning! After yet more meetings we 
signed a twentyone year lease with a renewal clause for a further twentyone 
year term and included was the all important pre-emption clause which gave us 
first refusal to buy the freehold if and when the airfield is finally no longer 
required for defence purposes and is offered for sale. The vital lesson learnt 
was, in our Democracy, no matter how hard they kick you in the teeth or 
anywhere else, get up smiling and start again.
The second Battle for Lasham started in 1982 when David Carrow and I 
met the Ministry people in order to implement the second twentyone year term 
of our lease. Although the battle was slightly less acrimonious though just as 
long winded as the first one, we had leamt a trick or two from the first battle and 
won at the end. At the same time we suggested that as the airfield was quite 
obviously no longer a state asset to be retained in public ownership for 'future 
defence purposes', they might as well let us buy it. Trying to persuade the Men 
from the Ministry that bow and arrow production had ceased some centuries 
before, was a futile exercise and thus we got precisely nowhere as they stood 
their ground and refused to move.
Many, many meetings followed and at one glorious meeting which John 
Delafield arranged for us with the top Ministry property man, we were informed 
that as the work in the black hangar on the south side of the airfield was so very 
secret, it could not even be discussed. Tony Mattin, the then Chairman of LGS, 
and I were forced to retire gracefully though not gratefully. Being nosy glider 
pilots he and 
I went over to the hangar, found the doors open and a 
disconsolate gent leaning on his broom. We asked him what he was doing 
there and he explained that he was a 'resting' actor who had been sent to act 
as the cleaner by the local Unemployment Office in Alton. He kindly showed us 
round inside and we much admired sundry old wooden crates, a few beaten up 
vehicles and various bits of rusting equipment!
In those days the infamous 'D' notice prevented newspapers from 
publishing 'sensitive' material and the Official Secrets Act was king. At the time 
of writing, a 'Freedom of Information' Act is being actively discussed, and if 
adopted and passed by the Government, one wonders what new devilment 
'they' will dream up. One day soon I have promised myself a treat, a visit to the 
Public Record Office at Kew to read all official papers relating to Lasham, it 
should prove to be most enlightening.
Luckily a good friend of very long standing now came to the aid of the party. 
He was the Member of Parliament, Sir David Mitchell, then the Minister of State

--- PAGE 108 ---
116 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
for Transport, and he agreed to go in to bat on our behalf. With his help, 
influence and guidance we finally reached an agreement with the Ministry of 
Defence that we could buy a very long lease on the 284 acres we occupy of 
the 500 odd acres which make up Lasham airfield. After endless more 
meetings, we had to settle for a 49 year lease with a renewal option for a further 
seven year term terminating in 2045 AD for a capital payment of £180,000. The 
rent thereafter was a notional peppercorn per year, if called for! Just when we 
thought that we were home and dry, the boys at the Ministry started again.
At this point we asked Bill Walker MP, a Vice President of the British Gliding 
Association who acted as the Association's spokesman in the House of Commons, 
to help by firing a shot across the Minister's bow which he did to great effect. The 
letter to him dated 17 September 1991 from the Earl of Arran, the Parliamentary 
Under Secretary of State for Defence for the Armed Forces, is priceless:
"Dear Bill, Thank you for your letter dated 23 August to Kenneth Carlisle 
concerning the Lasham Gliding Society's new lease of Lasham airfield from the 
Ministry of Defence. 
I am afraid that there has been an inexcusable 
bureaucratic delay in dealing with this case in the Department. However, I can 
tell you that the matter has now been sorted out and the agents acting for 
Lasham Gliding Society are being contacted to complete the transaction. I am 
very sorry that this problem arose".
More champagne! But even then, the Ministry men pricked our balloon just 
a little, they insisted on back dating the lease to the beginning of 1989. As soon 
as the ink was dry, we started again, 'please, now can we buy the freehold ?'. 
Patrick Garnett, as Chairman of the Property Committee, who was also the 
LGS Solicitor and a former Chairman of the Surrey Club and Lasham and I now 
attended lots and lots of meetings, bent ears wherever we could and kept on 
and on and on! That little skirmish is still going on but at the time of writing we 
have reason to believe that we are almost there. Yet again Sir David Mitchell 
provided the key to the door by introducing me to my incoming local Member 
of Parliament who was at the time the Minister for Defence Procurement at the 
Ministry of Defence, the very man who was in charge of our little corner of their 
empire. The old adage of "Who you know, not what you know" is still true 
though in modern parlance it is called 'Networking'. Whatever, it works.
A friend has told me that in Ministry circles, the 'Lasham gliders' are 
considered 'a very determined lot!'
The problem of paying for Lasham is a far less daunting affair than all the 
years of fighting has been to achieve our goal. In 1982 I started the 'Lasham 
Trust' and at the same time at last was able to persuade the Committee of the 
day to institute an airfield purchase fund. Now I have the simple (!) task of 
inciting our members and friends to donate just half a million pounds which, 
added to our other funds, will see us home. Fund raising is not much fun, you 
get brickbats from a few members, mostly the ones who enjoy the fruits of other 
people's generosity and not often any thanks or appreciation for a task no one 
else seems to be willing to undertake. However, when our goal is achieved, I 
promise not to ask for any more donations ever-and to die happy!

--- PAGE 109 ---
Chapter Sixteen - The Battle for Lasham________________________117
.brother can you spare a dime or two?
LASHAM GLIDING SOCIETY LTD
LASHAM GLIDING CENTRE ALTON HANTS
Telephone: HER RIAflD 270
COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT
. 
F. G. Irvirtg M.Enj 0<C AFRAEi
w.A.H.*rtf. 
torch 1962
P. Mtaton 6 Si<E<*i ACGI
..
J, Smpson r«A 
J. N. Cocbrone BA (G««w»i M»nj|tf i
An appeal for the National
and Commonwealth Gliding Centre
Since the war British glider pilots and British gliders ami ancillary equipment have been the most consistently 
successful iu World Championships Our pilots and machines iiave won iirst and second places more often than 
those of any other nation. We are today the largest exporters of high-performance machines in the world and have 
sold gliders to every continent. The only British-designed and British-built aircraft sold to Russia since the war 
have been gliders.
Although this is extremely satisfactory, we Sack a National Centre where our methods and techniques can be 
taught not only to a greater number of our own pilots, but also to pilots from abroad who will then buy our 
equipment for use in their own countries. All the Iron Curtain countries and most other European nations have 
established such centres, and we are in danger of losing our markets and the lending position in our sport.
Unlike countries abroad, we are not subsidized by our Government. We do not want a subsidy, since we 
value our independence. The British Gliding Association manages and regulates gliding without' cost to the 
taxpayer, and our record of safety and competence is the best in the world.
The National and Commonwealth Centre is now being established at Lasham Gliding Centre. Lasham is « 
wartime aerodrome situated between Alton and Basingstoke in North-east Hampshire. The eight hundred members 
of the eigbt clubs which operate at Lasham have formed a friendly Society called the Lasham Gliding Society, and 
this co-ordinartfi all flying, provides all facilities and employs the permanent staff. It is administered by a Com­ 
mittee of Management whose elected members are the senior members of the clubs and whose secretary is the 
full-time general manager.
After eleven years of uncertainty owing to lack of security of tenure, the Society has been granted a 21-year 
lease (with an option to renew for a further term of 21 years) by the Ministry of Aviation.
To date we have had to make do with unsatisfactory buildings erected during the war; these reached the end 
of their useful life some time ago and we must now demolish them and rebuild. Our three vital needs are a hangar, 
workshops and a living block comprising bedrooms, lecture rooms, restaurant, bar and offices. A start has been 
made on the hangar, as we could not protect our equipment in the dangerous and leaking old hangar for yet another 
winter.
All this is costing a great dea! of money— in fact we need £40,000. An appeal to our members has produced 
gifts of over £1 7,500 so far and 1 am confident of raising £20,000 from them when they have all contributed. May 
i aik you to help us 10 achieve our goal? We have helped ourselves to the best of our ability but are now facing 
the problem of raising the difference. Although we could raise a loan we feel that this would be imprudent, as it 
\vould saddle us with a large repayment problem which would undoubtedly raise the cost of gliding and thus 
defeat our object.
We earnestly believe that our efforts at Lasham are really valuable to the welt-being and prosperity of this 
country.
*'. . . The air has come of age in this half-century with a hurst oj energy and momentum oj development. I do not 
believe this momentum will be attowrti io flag in other counifu:\ ami wt mini not lei it flag in ours either.
"Our young men must be convinced fhai in the air lies real adventure^ interest and reward. . . "
Lord Mountbatten, December 16, 1961.
Please do help us so that we can help others— we shall be most grateful. May I ask you to send any donations 
to me at the address above. If I can give you any further information, please ring me at my London office, telephone 
number FLEET STREET 5751, and I will willingly come and see you.
Yours sincerely,
Chairman. Appeai Committee, Lashom Gliding Society Ltd
Printing of Ibu klief lionait J by ftKitt'l ImaautvHo!

--- PAGE 110 ---
118 
A Glider Pilot Bold..
[^4
Telephone 
OFFICE 
HERRIARD322 
MEMBERS 
HERRIARD 270 
(STO CODE: 025-6831
THE LASKAH TRUST
LASIIAM airfield in Hampshire is the home of the Lasham Gliding Society, the
largest unsubsidised gliding centre in the world. 
It provides flyjng facilities
for more than a thousand pilots and trainees a year and makes a major
contribution to the encouragment of airmindedness in Britain.
The lease of the airfield granted by the Government to the Society expires in
the year 2004, but includes a pre-emption clause in the Society's favour. 
It
allows the Society to use 284 acres of the airfield including the runways.
Long-term security of tenure of the site is vital to the continuance of gliding 
at Lasham into the future. 
To achieve that, it is essential that we purchase 
the freehold. 
In July 1986, our lease will still have 18 years to run, that 
should allow us to purchase at a favourable price and, as the Government seem to 
be willing to sell off some of their holdings, that will, in all probability, be 
the most opportune moment to buy.
In order to do so, we have to raise a great deal of money and to that end the 
LASHAM TRUST has been created. 
The Trustees have been charged by the Society 
with the creation of a fund which will make the purchase of Lasham a certainty.
On behalf of the Trustees and for the benefit of all present and future 
airminded people of both sexes who develop through and enjoy the sport of 
gliding, I appeal to you for your financial help and fund-raising efforts to 
secure the future of Lasham. 
To all of you who have ever flown from Lasham, are 
currently flying at Lasham or have the long-term aviation interests of this 
country at heart, we do ask for your help.
The various facilities which the Society provides are funded directly by the 
members. 
However, this major project of raising some £400,000 to purchase the 
airfield will require help from all possible sources. 
Ours is a technological 
sport which undoubtedly develops in pilots a greater understanding of matters 
aeronautical, teaches not only self-reliance but also team spirit and in the 
young has proved to be very character-forming. 
It is a team sport on the 
ground, an individual sport in the air; 
a brawn sport on the ground, a brain 
sport in the air. 
Certainly a unique activity.
Do please read on .... 
Yours very sincerely,
WALTER A.H. KAHN 
Chairman, Appeal Committee
JUNE 1985
LASHAM GLIDING SOCIETY LIMITED 
Lasham Aerodrome, Alton, Hants.GU34 5SS
National Gliding Centra : Member of the British Glkling Association. General Manager: PHIL PHILLIPS

--- PAGE 111 ---
Chapter 17
Fund raising and Downbeat
W
ith the signing of our lease in 1962, re-cladding the hangar to make it 
safe was our first priority, to be followed by building a new clubhouse 
worthy of The Gliding Centre'. As parts of the roof of the hangar kept 
falling off, we stored all the gliders in the other large T2. sited in the field north 
of Beech Avenue. Every day at the start of gliding and at the end of the day we 
moved everything across the road on to and back from the airfield. Neither our 
members nor the traffic using the Avenue were too happy with this arrangement. 
An appeal letter was produced, I signed seven thousand of them personally 
(never again) which were sent to our members and friends and I set out to 
canvass possible donors up and down the land. Unfortunately for us, Brigadier 
George Chatterton, the former Commanding Officer of the Glider Pilot 
Regiment, ably supported by Sir Fredrick Hoare, the immediate past Lord 
Mayor of London, was also raising funds for his 'Upward Bound Trust' which to 
this day provides gliding training at Thame airfield near Aylesbury for 
youngsters in memory of those who flew gliders during the war. He and I met 
very often going into or coming out from the offices of likely sponsors.
Sometimes in life, ripe apples do fall off frees at the most opportune moment. 
On 16 December 1961, at the annual Air League lunch, the guest of honour, 
Admiral Lord Mountbatten, finished his speech with these stirring words, "The air 
has come of age in this half century with a burst of energy and momentum of 
development. I do not believe this momentum will be allowed to flag in other 
countries and we must not let it flag in ours either. Our young men must be 
convinced that in the air lies real adventure, interest and reward..." It was 
obviously tailor made for our appeal and having quite innocently used the splendid 
quote from his speech in the appeal letter, I was ordered to his office to be given 
a monumental rocket by him. "How dare you, don't you know that you are not 
supposed to use any statements made by Royalty without prior permission! You 
will go to the Palace and explain that you failed to ask, you will apologise and 
return to me when you have done so!" he thundered. For once I kept silent and 
did not explain that I was not aware of his Royal status. When Commander Mike 
Parker ushered me into HRH the Duke of Edinburgh's room to make my abject 
apology, my appeal efforts were immediately rewarded. Writing out a cheque, he 
handed it to me with the instruction to show it to his Uncle as proof of the apology 
and suggested that I might even be given a donation by the Admiral. My return 
visit was happier than the first, after which he sent me a gracious letter hand 
written in green ink accepting my apology but sadly no cheque.
Kenneth MacAlpine of the famous building and construction family agreed to 
design and build our clubhouse and so one day I was despatched in an Auster 
to Luton Airport to fly an architect and his wife to Lasham for a site inspection. 
On arrival, as I had no idea what he looked like, I went to the information desk

--- PAGE 112 ---
120 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
and explained my problem. "That's easy, I'll announce your arrival, call for your 
man and then announce your departure" said the helpful lady. Over the public 
address system, the waiting bucket and spade brigade heard "Lasham Airways 
announce the arrival of flight No.1 from Lasham. Will passengers please 
proceed to Gate No.3. Lasham Airways Flight No.2 to Lasham will depart in 
fifteen minutes". The faces of the holidaymakers as we climbed into the Auster 
parked next to various airliners was a classic and made it a day to remember. 
He designed a beautiful two storey clubhouse but well beyond our meagre 
means. Happily a club member called Robin Cole came up trumps and let us 
buy the prototype of his revolutionary 'Kingsworthy' building for an absolute snip. 
It is of interest that the Dunstable clubhouse designed by Kit Nicholson and our 
Lasham 'Condor' building both won design awards in their day, though it must 
be admitted that theirs is attractive whereas ours is purely functional.
We had collected just enough money to re-clad the hangar and build the 
clubhouse but with nothing left over for the internal fittings and fixtures. Frank 
Kinder, an architect member, designed the interior but we had a major shortfall. 
The problem was soon solved by a chance meeting with a Director of British 
European Airways. Over lunch at the Royal Aero Club I timidly asked what they 
intended to do with the contents of their West London Terminal which was 
being replaced by a new ten storey one in Cromwell Road in London. I 
explained our needs and one week later the Board agreed to let us tender for 
all the kitchen equipment, the complete bar and cafeteria complete with tables 
and chairs. A figure was agreed but at that moment we still did not have a bean! 
Lady Luck in the guise of Wladek 'Rad' Radwanski smiled on us. He was a 
great man then running a restaurant in the City of London which was one of my 
favourite lunchtime haunts. He had studied Law at Warsaw University but 
realising that war was fairly imminent persuaded his father to let him transfer to 
the Polish Air Force. He achieved his ambition to become a fighter pilot, then a 
test pilot and when Poland fell, fled first to France and then to England. He 
joined the Air Transport Auxiliary ferrying a variety of aircraft to squadrons 
around the country. Philip Wills, then second in command of ATA, 
remembers'Rad' as the member of a very select team of pilots used for the 
most dangerous urgent flights carried out in very unsuitable weather. Before 
the end of the war 'Rad' managed to transfer to the RAF and joined Bomber 
Command. When he was demobilised, not wishing to return to Russian 
occupied Poland, he found himself at a loose end with no prospects, money or 
job. While at university, the students had rebelled at the low quality of the food 
in their canteen and 'Rad' found himself in charge of the kitchens. So now he 
decided on catering, started as a waiter, saved his money and eventually 
bought The Charterhouse' in Charterhouse Square. When I first met him, he 
was sad and lost due to a personal bereavement and we talked flying 
endlessly. When the Lasham shortfall problem was explained, he readily 
agreed to give us the required amount on condition that he could have any 
surplus equipment for a derelict hotel he was refurbishing at Salfords in Surrey.

--- PAGE 113 ---
Chapter Seventeen — Fund raising and downbeat 
121
Later to help Poland's economy, he started 'Anglo Polish Sailplanes' and 
importing gliders for sale in the United Kingdom.
So 'Operation Downbeat', our code name standing for 'Demolition of West 
London British European Airways Terminal' was set in motion. We realised that 
we would have to work fast as some of the demolition crew had ideas not 
dissimilar from ours. On a Wednesday at six in the evening we hit the building 
like a plague of locusts and set to with a will which surprised everyone. By the 
next evening, the kitchen, cafeteria and bar were stripped bare and our goodies 
safely stored off the site under lock and key. The rest of the building proved 
very inviting and the arrival and departure desks looked very tempting, as did 
light fittings, door stops, fire hoses and many other desirable objects. The 
Lasham Air Scouts had their eyes on the wooden floor tiles and some wash 
basins, and a metal grille in front of the bookshop was just what we needed for 
our bar. A quick decision had to be made and as my remit was only to take what 
was agreed, the others banished me to what had been the bar, there to act as 
'Camp Clearance Officer' to whom they would come for permission to 'liberate' 
whatever took their fancy. They never did and my conscience therefore was 
almost clear! "If we took it," I said to myself, "it would go to a good cause. If we 
did not, it would probably be taken and sold with the cash going to someone 
who did not have the same high ideals as we had". At least that was the speech 
I was mentally preparing to give from the dock if... All was well until I was sent 
for by the Station Manager who was livid because someone had broken into 
his 'private' store and removed various items. Just as he was demanding that 
we return everything, I saw a crocodile of small Air Scouts emerge from one 
door carrying a set often wash basins all still connected together with their hot 
and cold copper pipes. To save the day and to prevent him seeing this 
remarkable spectacle, I grabbed him by his lapels, put my face very close to 
his and started an animated diatribe on the unfairness of his allegations until I 
saw the crocodile disappear through another door. He went off, totally puzzled 
but did not trouble us again. Some of the basins can still be seen in the Vintage 
Glider Club building at Lasham. As we worked from six in the evening until 
midnight, we were all getting very tired. Two Security Guards who were 
watching two worn out young Imperial College students sawing up a highly 
desirable departure desk with a two handed saw, took pity on them, told them 
to have a rest while they carried on until their boss man arrived unexpectedly. 
By Saturday evening we had finished. All our goodies we had moved in glider 
trailers to a temporary safe storage building out of sight of prying eyes.
After we had taken our pick, the office hatch desk and a few light fittings in 
the Lasham clubhouse survive to this day, we sold various items to other clubs 
which did wonders for our finances. The only money we had to spend on 
equipping our new clubhouse was under three pounds for notice boards green 
baize. By dint of Frank Irving's standing as a very senior lecturer in Aeronautics 
at the Imperial College of Science and Technology, we were given permission 
to store our goodies for a very short time in an adjacent building to the College.

--- PAGE 114 ---
122 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
Our Aladdin's cave was on the ground floor of the imposing structure now in the 
middle of the Imperial College complex in South Kensington known as the 
Imperial Institute lower much loved by Sir John Betjeman who successfully 
lobbied Parliament to save it for the Nation. As the preservation works were 
due to start on the following Wednesday, there was no time for us to collect the 
remainder of the desks, fire hoses and reels, and light fittings stored there. In 
order to stabilise the building, concrete was pumped into the first and second 
floors of the tower. When eventually the tower is finally demolished, people will 
be very surprised when our surplus embedded in concrete comes to light. After 
we left at six in the evening for a well deserved pint or two, an upper floor of 
the new terminal building caught fire at 2 o'clock the next morning! When my 
chum telephoned the Chairman of the Airline to give him the news, the 
Chairman said "Right, transfer back to the old building, ready for our 
passengers in the morning". When lan replied, "Sorry, not possible, the gliders 
have stripped it bare" there was a pause followed by the classic reply from the 
great and noble Lord, "The bastards, have they now!"
A Winter Night at Lasham 
Words by RP
A swarthy, bulky Lashamite, creeping through the dark
He says he's got up early, to D.I. a Skylark
But we know better, this blackguard can't D. I.
He's our resident fund raiser, surveying the Southern sky
The time is just five thirty/twill soon be morning light
He hears a plane approaching a droning in the night
It's the Rapide fully laden, with smuggled precious stones
It lands upon the runway.
The cold wind bites his bones
A sack is thrown out to him, the Rapide roars away
Its destination, Ireland.
Before the break of day
As dawn creeps o'er the pylon our hero trudges back
It's for the cause of gliding that he lugs that precious sack
His actions may be risky, but he's a clever boy
His mission is for gliding-in comfort and joy
He thinks not of the diamonds that his smuggled prize
contains
But toilets, a clubhouse, and miles ofluverly drains
This is but one example of what our members try
In order to ensure that 'The Hub' will never die
Pray join me in a toast - To Wally and his gang
Their efforts won us Lasham.
A place to fly and prang!

--- PAGE 115 ---
______ 
Chapter 18
Wills, the World Champs and the Irish
A
s Chairman of the BGA Development Committee, it was my duty to 
squeeze money out of the Department of Education and quite a number 
of clubs were able to buy gliders, winches and other equipment as the 
result of dipping into the public purse. In late 1963 the policy changed and our 
source of funds dried up abruptly. One evening in November after a 
particularly festive Tobacco Trade Dinner, a crowd of us finished up in the W 
D & H O Wills hospitality suite at the Dorchester Hotel. During the banter that 
followed, John Wilson, then the Marketing Director of the company, boasted 
that Wills were the major sponsors of sport in the UK. Quick as a flash I bet 
him that my sport was not on his list and added that if I was proved correct he 
would have to agree to help us. Gliding won and the Wills (Philip Wills was not 
a relation of the great tobacco family from Dulverton) largesse thereafter knew 
no bounds. Numerous flying scholarships were followed by an imaginative 
competition for club nominated pilots who were put through a very fierce test 
of their gliding skills and technical knowledge with one northern and one 
southern region winner each to take a shiny new Slingsby T.49 two sealer to 
be donated to their respective clubs. Two Ultra radios and two Winter 
barographs were given to the 2nd and 3rd best pilots. Fred Slingsby agreed 
to the name 'Capstan', so called after a leading Wills cigarette brand of the 
day, to be the designated name for his new T.49 side by side training machine. 
The first production glider Wills donated to the BGA to be used by the National 
Coach. Unfortunately the Capstans were not finished in time for the 'Wills 
Challenge' so two K.6 single seaters were given as the major prizes. They 
were much appreciated by the winning clubs and, for the record, do read the 
report in the October/November 1968 edition of Sailplane and Gliding written 
by a sweet modest young blonde girl called Gillian Howe who proudly took a 
K.6 back to the Cotswold Club at Aston Down. Thirty years on, she is still as 
pretty as she was then as her photograph in S & G will confirm! Fame brings 
its own reward and she was offered a job in the BGA office where she met 
another young pilot called Justin Wills. For years now she has emulated her 
famous mother in law, Kitty Wills, by chasing after her husband for more miles 
in different countries of the world than most wives have ever done.
More Wills sponsorship competitions followed and by the time W D & H O Wills 
moved on to newer money hungry spectator sports such as Formula One motor 
racing, they had given us nearly One Million Pounds in today's money. As Britain 
was chosen to host the 1965 World Gliding Championship, Wills really came up 
smeiling of roses and promised to underwrite the whoie cost of the enterprise. 
Their financial aid and media expertise made the event held at South Cemey near 
Cirencester a great success. The weather was not too kind and the foreigners 
found flying over England rather difficult but a great time was had by all.

--- PAGE 116 ---
124 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
The Irish Gliding Association decided to enter a team for the very first time 
and invited Paddy Kearon to be their senior pilot. Paddy was a truly 
tremendous human being. I make no apology for my obvious hero worship, my 
generation was brought up to revere and respect great men of whom there 
were still a large number (do I hear "unlike today"?). It is a sad reflection of our 
time that now when most young people are asked to name just one or two of 
their personal heroes, they seem to have considerable trouble to think of any, 
let alone ones who are still alive today and who they might even have met. 
Norman Walter 'Paddy' Kearon was and always will be one of my special 
heroes and of all the thousands of glider pilots I have met, he was the nicest, 
the kindest and the best friend of all.
Born in Dublin, Paddy came from a long line of Wicklow seafarers. An 
outstanding athlete, he just missed being selected to run for Ireland in the 1936 
Olympics but, on coming to England, represented the London Metropolitan 
Police in various National and International races as a superb miler. He joined 
the RAF in 1939 and although an Equipment Officer was mentioned in 
despatches no less than five times. We first met in 1945 when Paddy was one 
of the many Wing Commanders (we decided the collective noun for them was 
'a flush of W/Cs') who started gliding at Salzgitter and Oerlinghausen.
He was a typical great Irishman who had a tremendous sense of humour 
and a total lack of pretentiousness; the ability to make endless pints of Guinness 
disappear which always made me wonder why the Liffey ever had any water 
flowing through Dublin's fair city; and an ever open helping hand for anyone in 
need. The RAF Gliding Centre at Bicester which he was mainly instrumental in 
creating, the battles to protect Andy Gough the Chief Instructor and other 
servicemen who he 'lost' from other duties and his continual successes in 
acquiring gliders and equipment are all testimonies to his dedication to our 
sport. There is no doubt that without him RAF Gliding would have withered and 
died and moreover his perpetual fight to further the interests of service gliding 
did not endear him to his Lords and Masters. But for that, although he retired as 
an Air Commodore, he would undoubtedly have reached even higher rank.
Captain Kelly Rogers, the most famous of all Irish flying pioneers, was the 
prime mover of the Irish entry. Paddy asked me to be the Team Manager 
explaining that with an emigre Irishman serving in the British Royal Air Force as 
one pilot, a New Zealander called Tom Evans, an Aer Lingus pilot with an Irish 
wife as another and an English tax exile called Mike Slazenger of the tennis 
equipment family as the third, he felt that as my wife's mother had been born a 
Doran in Dublin, my inclusion in the team made it almost respectably Irish.
When Paddy and I flew over to be instructed by Captain Kelly Rogers to "put 
Ireland on the gliding map, even if you don't win" we knew what we had to do. As 
he had arranged for us to be interviewed on Irish television by a formidable lady 
called Petronella O'Flanagan who was as large as she was fierce, he decided that 
I should have an Irish name and from that moment on was no longer Wally Kahn 
but Seamus O'Caihan. After the interview Petronella invited us to dinner at the

--- PAGE 117 ---
Chapter Eighteen - Wills, the World Champs and the Irish
125
\\ally Kahn (Author), Paddy Kearon, Tom Evans
Dolphin Hotel, then owned by Ma Nugent whose late husband had been my 
family company's Irish agent for very many years. The Dolphin was a wonderful 
watering hole much frequented by the horse racing and arty fraternity. Ma and 
Petronella entertained us in such great style that when at last we were poured out 
of the place in the early hours, neither of us could remember the name let alone 
the location of our hotel. We wandered the streets of Dublin until we found a house 
offering bed and breakfast. Being knocked up by two drunks in the early hours of 
the morning did not seem to worry the owner at all, in fact he was probably quite 
used to it. He showed us into a downstairs room which had two fairly rudimentary 
beds on one side and the biggest wedding cake I have ever seen on the floor on 
the other side. We were made to swear on the Holy Bible that we would not touch 
the cake and at last fell asleep. After what was probably only about two hours we 
were woken up by an enormous commotion and confronted by a large and very 
irate female who accused us of peeing on her daughter's wedding cake. As 
neither of us had any recollections of what we might have done during the night 
and were desperately trying to think of plausible denials, the large scruffy family 
dog came to our rescue. It walked into the room, went straight over to the cake 
and lifted its leg. Quick as a flash Paddy said, "Sure, I remember now, the beast 
came in during the night". The dog got his own back by leaving us some of his 
fleas-and to think we paid all of five shillings for the privilege.

--- PAGE 118 ---
126 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
At the World Champs we Irish decided to show the world a thing or two. 
Paddy organised the biggest radio truck fully equipped with HF and VHP radios. 
Our aerial array was so high and impressive that the organisers gave us a hard 
time as other teams suspected us of using some new and illegal technology. The 
fact that some American pilots were using VOR beacons for navigating which 
was strictly against the rules did not make our life any easier. At the opening 
ceremony all the teams were lined up in front of their national flags. It was a very 
cold day and we all froze during the carefully scripted' short' speech by Roy 
Jenkins, now Lord Jenkins of Hillhead, then the Minister of Aviation. Philip Wills 
as Chairman of the EGA and Ann Welch the Director of the Championships then 
introduced the Minister to each team in turn. With Captain Kelly Rogers' 
instructions ringing in my ears, I had dreamt up a fiendish plot to give the Press 
photographers a great photo-call opportunity and also produce good copy. My 
Lord Jenkins is renowned for his great love of fine Claret and I thought that he 
ought to sample some good Irish Whiskey, which later he admitted was to be the 
first and probably the last time in his life. A friend at Allied Breweries had given 
me an ample supply of cardboard cups which advertised the 'Double Diamond' 
brand of beer. Being only a temporary Irishman I failed to realise the explosive 
significance of the 'Double Diamond' logo which was a red hand! When the 
Minister reached us, I asked whether he was as cold as us and promptly pressed 
a paper cup in his hand, produced the Whiskey and gave him a generous Irish 
measure of three fingers albeit vertical rather than horizontal. Every time he tried 
to take a sip, he was introduced to another team member which gave my Press 
friends ample opportunity to get all the shots they wanted. At last Philip said that 
they must move on, so I turned the Minister round to face the press, gave him 
the Irish toast and suggested he knock his drink back in one. His face was a 
picture. Photographs of Roy Jenkins holding the cup were published in 
newspapers in fourteen different countries and our friends back in Dublin were 
delighted. Whether the cup with the Red Hand of Ulster on it was a diplomatic 
thing to do is open to doubt in view of the later sad events in Northern Ireland.
Every country was asked to host a party restricted to the pilots and their team 
managers. Each offered their native brand of fire water, the Americans had 
gallons of Bourbon, the Russians Vodka, the Yugoslavs produced Slivovitz and 
so on. We had only been able to scrounge a dozen bottles of Irish Whiskey which 
was obviously not enough for what we had in mind. On a non-flying day we 
rushed down to Somerset and collected one hundred gallons of the strongest 
scrumpy we could find and then announced that the Irish team cordially invited 
everybody at South Cerney to their party. The effect was electric, the result 
dramatic. Very few of our guests had ever sampled what we said was Irish 
Country Cider. The particular scrumpy we served was the unfiltered kind with a 
kick like a mule and no one had ever managed more than three pints. After an 
hour, bodies out to the world were lying about all over the place. At one stage the 
Assistant Russian Air Attache, Colonel Valentin Elistratov thanked me warmly for 
inviting him, expressed the opinion that "Your Irish cider not very strong" and

--- PAGE 119 ---
Chapter Eighteen — Wills, the ^\brld Champs and the Irish
127
promptly passed out at my feet. The next morning when the cleaners arrived to 
prepare the corner of the hangar we used for the morning briefing, they found 
over thirty people still fast asleep on the floor.
When after the farewell banquet and presentation of the prizes, the report in 
Sailplane and Gliding stated "All were cheered, the loudest cheer going to the Irish 
and the longest to the Russians". When we reported back to Captain Kelly Rogers 
he said "Well done boys, you didn't win but begorrah, they knew you were there!"
Your health Minister

--- PAGE 120 ---
___________________Chapter 19
We have 'em, 
even if they are not all there
N
o one book can hope to do justice to the rugged individualists who 
glide; their idiosyncrasies, their numerous stories and above all their 
strange and odd antics. At the time of writing, having 'glided', 'glid', 
'glud' or whatever you call it, for fiftyfour years without a break, I can only try 
to offer the reader a small selection to prove, though loveable, we are an odd 
lot! We come in all shapes and sizes, from dukes to dustmen and only severe 
mental disability prevents us from flying. Physical disadvantage is no bar, we 
have blind as well as deaf pilots, those who have only one leg, the great pilot 
and designer Wolf Hirth had a wooden leg which is why he fitted hinges to the 
bottom of the rudder pedals of his gliders, and others who suffer from more 
extreme problems. Mental problems of the thought process variety are less 
easily discernible. At Lasham we have two members known as 'Evans the 
elevator' and 'Evans the rudder'. The former is our presiding genius running 
the restaurant which provides fantastic food seemingly at all hours of the day, 
though how he acquired his nickname is his story which, if pressed, he will tell 
you. The latter is remembered for the occasion when the rudder of his Kestrel 
fell off just after he had released from the tug at 2000 feet. After careful 
consideration he decided to abandon ship but he remembered Derek Piggott's 
story of how he once told a pupil to bail out, but the student dithered and when 
Derek asked him why, after they were safely on the ground, the student said 
he was putting his sunglasses away!". 'Evans the rudder' had just bought a 
pair of very expensive prescription varifocal photochromic glasses which he 
feared would blow away if he jumped, so, being a former member of the 
Cambridge club he quickly analysed the problem, very carefully put them 
safely in the pocket of the glider and then jumped. For a minute after jumping 
out, he wondered if he had done the right thing, the glider as gliders will, 
seemed to be flying better without him and it struck him that he knew little 
about his parachute which the syndicate had just bought off another member. 
All went well. He was relatively undamaged as indeed apart from one wing 
was the Kestrel which came to earth quite near him. The glasses also came 
down, still in the fuselage, and were totally undamaged. John D'Arcy from 
whom they had bought the parachute had the last word "You're not very 
trusting are you? Got to test my 'chute' to make sure it works!"

--- PAGE 121 ---
130 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
Jumping out of gliders is not really something which anyone enjoys at the 
best of times but when things fall off your pride and joy, you have to take to the 
silk. One of our more adventurous Imperial College Club members was a very 
lucky little man. He had climbed in their club's Skylark 4 to 7,000 feet in cloud 
when it all turned to a can of worms. The speed built up alarmingly and sadly 
he failed to open his speed limiting dive brakes which would have solved his 
problems. The Skylark broke up, the fuselage split open like a pea pod and he 
found himself falling out downwards. He was so lucky, no part of the glider 
snagged his parachute and he floated gently to the ground. In point of fact, 
when the wreckage was examined, all the bits were found except the torque 
tube. An RAF helicopter from Odiham happened to be flying in the area, the 
crew watched and enthralled by the event, landed next to him in the field and 
took him back to their base. The glider pilot was not impressed or even very 
concerned by his lucky escape. Before he left, never to be seen again, he 
explained that as a trained parachutist it was just another jump!
The next story concerns a gentleman from 'up north'.
Our Club's the Yorkshire Club
To be sung to the tune of 'My girl's a Yorkshire Girl'
Our Club's the Yorkshire Club
Yorkshire through and through
Our Club's a right good Club
Eh, by gum, it's champion
Sling's got his works quite near
And lent us all his stuff
We chuck 'em about as soon as we get 'em
For we take some beating
We're tough
For good order and discipline and wanting to make certain that my memory 
was not playing tricks, I wrote to a certain renowned member of the Yorkshire 
club who figures in this 'Northern Saga of yesteryear': "Back in the 50's, or was 
it in the 60's, one of your members carried out a most interesting flight. You 
described him as a terribly nice, well brought up gentleman, although just a little 
vague! Please can you verify the story for me as I would like to use it" After a 
total silence and nil response, a telephone call to him confirmed my worst 
suspicions. He could not really remember the details but he was sure that I had 
muddled up two different flights. C'est tout, no more. Full stop. Collapse of stout 
party but to hell with it. Publish and be damned! Here it is:
Came the day when the proper gent decided to fly south from their Sutton 
Bank site in order to complete his Silver 'C' distance. The wind was right, the 
sky showed promise of lots of lovely white fluffy cumulus clouds and it had the 
makings of a classic 'barn door' day. Off he went in his Skylark full of the joys 
of spring and like the song said "... and the three little fishes swam and swam 
right over the dam". With the landscape underneath him changing apace, our

--- PAGE 122 ---
Chapter Nineteen - \Ve have 'em. even if they are not all there___________131
hero thought things are really going well, soon I will be miles away, maybe I 
should keep going on and on, I might then get my Gold 'C' Distance as well! 
On and on he flew, hour after hour, not having a clue of how far he had flown 
or for that matter where he was. Sitting there, munching a bar of chocolate, he 
tried to visualise his possible route. Keep heading south and when the sea 
comes into view, turn west and head for Cornwall. Easy really when you are a 
pundit but then a horrible thought struck him. Down south, on track, will be 
London Heathrow Airport. Have to avoid that! Just then, he suddenly saw a big, 
big aeroplane. It had windows all along the fuselage and as he watched he saw 
the wheels coming down. There in the distance was this huge airfield and HIS 
aeroplane was going down to land there. 'Heathrow, heavens, they must have 
seen me, what shall I do, best thing follow him, land there as well, apologise 
and all will be well'. So he followed HIS airliner down.
To the side of the long runway he saw a big building with a lovely grass area 
in front of it which looked like the perfect landing spot. His landing was text book 
and as he opened the canopy he heard clapping and cheering. On the building 
were lots of people and they were applauding him. He felt good, climbed out and 
bowed to them. They cheered and clapped again, so he bowed again and just 
then two large men drove up in a car. "I say you chaps, could you look after my 
glider, I just want to find a telephone". "Come with us" they said. "No one will 
come near your glider, we've been ordered to take you to Administration".
He was propelled along endless corridors and then pushed through a door 
marked 'Commandant' and saw him sitting behind a large desk. "I say, you are 
Skeffington Minor (obviously I have changed the name), I have not seen you 
since our school days, Gosh! you have done well for yourself, Commandant of 
Heathrow, who would have thought it". "You haven't changed since school, you're 
still a twit" he replied "and what's more I am not the Commandant of Heathrow, I 
am the Commandant of Birmingham Airport! What the blazes are you going 
here?" So our hero explained, how sad, he had completed the Silver 'C' distance 
but had missed the Gold 'C' distance. Now he would like to telephone the club, 
get someone to fly down and aerotow him home, "aerotow you home, from here! 
What are you talking about, don't you chaps have trailers?". "True, we do. But I 
have promised my wife that I would be back for dinner to-night. So please 
Skeffington, for old time's sake, just this once".
The Yorkshire Club Elder was walking past the telephone in the round 
clubhouse when he heard a member shout into the telephone "You landed 
where, Birm