
--- PAGE 2 ---
A Glider Pilot Bold..
f ttom % fRfltng liBttattg of

--- PAGE 3 ---
A Glider Pilot Bold...
Wally Kahn

--- PAGE 4 ---
A Glider Pilot Bold...
Wally Kahn
First edition published by Jardine Publishers 1998
Second edition published by Airplan Flight Equipment Ltd Copyright ©2008
Third edition published by Walter Kahn 2011
Copyright ©WALTER KAHN (1998 & 2008)
and Airplan Flight Equipment (2008)
WALTER KAHN 2011
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior
permission of the publisher, except by a reviewer who wishes to quote brief
passages in connection with a review written for inclusion in a newspaper,
magazine, or radio or television broadcast.
Every effort has been made by the author and the publishers to trace owners
of copyright material. The events described have been cross-checked
wherever possible and the author apologises for any errors or omissions
which may have arisen.
Cover photograph courtesy Neil Lawson. White Planes Co

--- PAGE 5 ---
A Glider Pilot Bold... 1st Edition original cover

--- PAGE 6 ---
Contents
Another bite of the cherry .................................................................................9
Chapter 1 
The early days and Oerlinghausen ..........................................15
Chapter 2 
More Oerlinghausen.................................................................19
Chapter 3 
Mindeheide and Scharfholdendorf ...........................................29
Chapter 4 
Dunstable and Redhill ..............................................................33
Chapter 5 
The Mynd and The Cambridge Club.. ............... .......................41
Chapter 6 
Comps and All ..........................................................................53
Chapter 7 
Denmark...................................................................................59
Chapters 
The BGABall............................................................................63
Chapter 9 
More of them and us ................................................................67
Chapter 10 
The Lasham Airfield history. .................................................. ...77
Chapter 11 
Robert Kronfeld ........................................................................83
Chapter 12 
Lasham. .............................. ......................................................87
Chapter 13 
Derek Piggott-Our hero! ........................................................93
Chapter 14 
Retrieves and other stories ......................................................99
Chapter 15 
Pont and Angers.....................................................................105
Chapter 16 
The battle for Lasham ............................................................109
Chapter 17 
Fund raising and downbeat. ................................................. ..119
Chapter 18 
Wills, the World Champs and the Irish.................................. .123
Chapter 19 
We have 'em even if they are not all there ............................129
Chapter 20 
More Hero's. ...................................................................... .....135
Chapter 21 
And finally. ....................................................... .......................141
Appendix 1 
Wings for Prudence. .......................................................... .....145
Appendix 2 
Fred Slingsby .........................................................................151
John Stanley Sproule...................................... ................ .......152
HCN Nick Goodhart............................ .................................... 156
Alan (Derek) Piggott.................... .................................. .........159
Humphrey Dimock..................................................................168
Naomi Heron-Maxwell................. .................................... .......169
Keeping up with the Jones'sss........... .................................... 172
Major General A J Deane-Drummond.. ........................... .......173
Appendix 3 
Wally Kahn's Gliding CV ........................................................175
Appendix 4 
Aselection of gliding songs..... .............................................. .179
Bibliography ..................................................................................................193
Index .............................................................................................................195

--- PAGE 7 ---
For Margaret the best crew chief and co-pilot ever

--- PAGE 8 ---
Another bite at the Cherry
S
adly in 1996 my wife died and to fill the lonely hours I sat down and wrote this 
book. Just after it was published two further momentous events occurred in my 
life. First and most rewarding was the successful culmination of my nearly fifty 
years relentless plotting, persuading, scheming, cajoling and fund raising which 
resulted in Her Majesty's Government at last agreeing to sell us the freehold of Lasham 
Airfield, all 504 acres at a very favourable price.
One of my very favourite films is John Huston's "The Treasure of Sierra Madre". In 
one scene with Humphrey Bogart, old man Waiter Huston performs a wonderful dance 
of joy. I had promised myself that on the day the freehold was ours, I would go to the 
runway intersection of the Lasham -1 had first walked there in 1944 while serving in the 
Royal Air Force - and copy that great dance of joy.
However, the second event spoilt my fun for on that very day, the Ides of March 
1999 I was being cut open in hospital so that a large nasty thingy could be cut out and 
removed from my inside. So I resolved that on the tenth anniversary I would carry out 
the dance but someone up there or down below had other ideas and lo and behold, I 
was back in doc being mucked about with yet again. Sadly now being far too decrepit 
I'll never be able to fulfil my promise.
Now to the present. AFE of Manchester, the parent company of RD Aviation to 
whom all glider pilots have willingly donated large sums in exchange for sundry items 
of equipment, sought my permission to republish my book but asked for a few more 
stories to be added. The phenomenal success of our British Glider Pilots, both male 
and female in World and European Gliding Championships, in the period from 1999 to 
2007 really should be recorded here and was the obvious choice. They have won no 
less than 12 Gold, 12 Silver and 6 Bronze World medals and 4 Gold, 4 Silver and 3 
Bronze European medals. However, the tally is surely ongoing so I will leave it to 
others to sing their praises at some future date. Some of my foreign gliding friends 
often ask me how and why we achieve this success. My answer is simple - happily we 
live on a small island where the weather is very changeable and so we have to fight the 
elements harder and be even more dedicated to our sport.
Therefore, instead, in the hope of stimulating young pilots to aim for the stars, I 
have penned a few vignettes describing just some of my heroes. They actually deserve 
better, but at least I have tried!
Luckily I have been able to take back my publishing rights and instead of producing 
yet another enlarged edition and then trying to sell copies to the world and his wife, I 
much prefer to make my book freely available for all to read. Some of the contents 
such as Derek Piggott's fantastic gliding C.V., the story of the Battle for and of Lasham 
and the brief outline biographies of some of the GREATS in gliding surely deserve the 
widest readership.
Not only is 'A Glider Pilot bold' now in the 'public domain' but I have also made 
arrangements that my gliding library of more than 125 titles, full sets of all our gliding 
magazines and lastly all the gliding ephemera printed material I have collected over the 
many years will be housed in the BGA offices so that anyone will have access to 
them.
My proud boast is that at the time of writing (2011) I have been hyper active both as 
a pilot and administrator in our Gliding Movement longer than anyone in our history. 
From 1945 without a break, only two non gliding holidays in all that time, I have 
enjoyed every second and wish all others the same joy and satisfaction when they 
indulge in our wonderful sport. 
January 2011

--- PAGE 9 ---
12
A Glider Pilot Bold...
In the spring of 1894, Albert LJwental, who worked in Dartmouth, became airborne on the 
slopes above the River Dart in a machine he designed and built himself. This little known 
achievement some years before the \\right brothers flew, makes him one of the earliest pioneers 
of heavier than air flying machines

--- PAGE 10 ---
Preface
G
liding is the best sport in the world! Whenever and wherever soaring
pilots meet, their talk of thermal up-currents and cross-country flights
comes thick and fast. Every pilot must tell his own flying stories as not
only do they enrich our enjoyment of our sport but also they are a vital teaching
aid for the younger, less experienced pilots.
Since 1920, when the sport literally 'took off', there have been three quite
distinct phases of development. The pre-war era of trial and error, frustration
and very hard physical effort was followed by the post-war expansion and the
rapid increase in competitions, cross country flying and the growth of privately
owned gliders coupled with the firm re-establishment of gliding clubs. The third
phase was the introduction of closed circuit racing in very high performance
machines made not of wood, but first of glass fibre and then the even stronger
carbon fibre which has totally transformed the sport. The beginner, however,
still has to hone his skills on less sophisticated training gliders most of which
were also in use in the second phase.
Unfortunately the increasing demands made on the modern racing pilot
have, to my mind, had a detrimental effect on the social, clubby atmosphere
which prevailed earlier and gave the sport tremendous cohesion and to all
pilots a sense of belonging to the same sporting family.
For that reason I have tried to tell some stories about events and people
which if not recorded now, will be lost in the fullness of time, which would be a
very great pity. If your own favourite story is not included, tell it often and maybe
some day another anthology of gliding tales will be produced. My own personal
flying stories, like those of other pilots, I keep for long winter evenings in front
of a warm fire when my logbooks are produced and nostalgia is king.
Finally I do want to thank the thousands of glider pilots who over the years
have made my life so very full and immensely pleasurable. Also I must thank
the many patient and kind friends who tried valiantly to make this book almost
readable by correcting my prose, grammar, punctuation and stories.
'Tell a story to an average Englishman and he'll laugh three times. The first
time is when you tell the joke as he is polite. The second time is when you explain
it as he wants to show you that he got the point, and the third time is when he
finally sees the joke because he enjoys a good story as well as the next man.
Tell a joke to an average Frenchman and he'll laugh twice. The first time is
when you tell it, as he too is polite. The second time is when you explain it as
he understands it at once.
Tell a joke to an American and he'll laugh once-when you tell it. Don't waste
your time explaining it he'll never understand your strange British humour.
Tell a story to a glider pilot and before you're half way through, he'll stop
you, he has heard a much better version and what the hell do you think you are
doing spoiling his story in the first place?
January 1998

--- PAGE 11 ---
The Ballad
Words by Pat Wood 
Tune: The Airman's lament
A glider pilot bold was he 
A maiden unsuspecting she 
He landed one day near her home 
Demanding tea and telephone
Her dainty heart had missed a beat 
Steep turns at five and twenty feet 
The field was very very small 
The trees were very very tail
But there he was quite safe and sound 
Her dainty heart it gave a bound 
To see him stand so debonair 
The answer to that maiden's prayer
They dallied there for many hours 
Among the birds and bees and flowers 
And when at last the trailer came 
Alas she'd lost her maiden name
What followed it is sad to tell 
He drove away as darkness fell 
And though devotion he did swear 
He soon forgot that maiden fair
Till after many moons there came 
A letter headed with the name 
Of Swindle, Swindle, Son and Sinn 
Solicitors of Lincolns Inn
Dear Sir, our client wishes us 
To say that though she wants no fuss 
500 smackers more or less 
Will keep this matter from the Press
The moral you may clearly see 
The ordinary flying fee 
Is less expensive than you thought 
Compared with other forms of sport.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Chapter 1
The early days and Oerlinghausen
I learnt at a very early age that adrenalin was brown.
O
n Saturday 26 June 1937, as an eleven-year-old, I had gone to the 
famous Royal Air Force Air Display at Hendon aerodrome in northwest 
London, the airfield which the early pioneer Claude Grahame-White 
had created before the First World War. On one small part of what was the 
airfield is now the home of the RAF Museum which is well worth a visit.
Being then, would you believe, a small thin little boy it was difficult for me 
to force my way to the front of the crowd in order to get a good view of the 
proceedings. Being ever foolhardy, I climbed on to a hangar roof without being 
spotted and thus secured a perfect place from which everything could be seen. 
When four Kestrel-engined Hawker Fury aeroplanes, then the front-line single- 
seat fighters in service with the RAF, gave the most exciting display described 
in the official programme as 'A demonstration of advanced formation flying by 
a Flight of Four Pilots of No. I Squadron', everybody watched enthralled. The 
seven different set pieces consisting of formation changes while performing 
various aerobatic manoeuvres in very close proximity to each other was a 
spectacle only equalled to-day by the very best aerobatic teams in the world. 
When it was over, all applauded including this injudicious enthusiast, who was 
so carried away with the excitement, that I promptly fell off the roof and impaled 
my right wrist on an iron railing. The rest of the display was missed as the view 
from the Station Hospital was non-existent. By a strange quirk of fate, exactly 
ten years later I was crewing in the National Gliding Championships for Wing 
Commander Prosser Hanks, then a Pilot Officer in No.1 Squadron, one of the 
very pilots I had been watching so avidly.
The event that day taught me a valuable lesson - always make certain that 
you have the best and the safest seat in the house.
If you are afflicted by aviation mania there is really only one cure. Get close 
to aeroplanes wherever and whenever. At school we had an Avro 504K which 
was housed on the top floor of the Science Building. It provided me with many 
happy hours, sitting in the cockpit and pretending that I was flying with Ball, 
Mannock and Bishop. When the war started, the powers that be decided to 
move the Avro to a safer location and it was lowered by ropes to the ground. 
Unfortunately the ropes broke under the strain and a crowd of small boys 
watched horror stricken as we saw our first "prang".
In the autumn of 1944 a posting to 2 Fighter/Bomber Group, 2nd Tactical Air 
Force, found me at Hartford Bridge (now called Blackbushe) and then Lasham 
before rushing through France, Holland and then on to Germany at the end of 
the war. By then, as I was a very spare bod and a bolshie one at that, some 
bright spark sent me off to help start a gliding club as a recreation centre for 
Group personnel. A few miles from the Group Headquarters in Gutersloh is 
Oerlinghausen, just east of Bielefeld, which had been a well established wartime

--- PAGE 13 ---
16 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
gliding school. It was here that the 2 Group Gliding Club now started operations. 
But we were short of gliders and decided to look for more. We acquired two 
huge aircraft recovery trailers affectionately known as "Queen Marys" which 
were towed by three-ton lorries to be used on our raiding parties to find any 
gliders which had not been smashed. Unhappily both our and the American 
Governments had decreed that all German military stores were to be destroyed. 
We arrived at Scharfholdendorf just after twelve empty Kranich two-seaters had 
been pushed over the side of that wonderful ridge. At an airfield in the American 
Zone we found thirty Bucker Jungmeister training aeroplanes in a tight circle, all 
tipped up on their noses about to be burnt by a zealous G.I. We tried to rescue 
some of the instrument panels but our friendly ally threatened to shoot us if we 
did not go away. The Americans were very anti-gliding as one of their Colonels 
had just been killed in a glider and thus their destructive activities were carried 
out with real enthusiasm. At the Wasserkuppe, they had a field day using 
machine guns to shoot down gliders hanging in the rafters.
Nevertheless we were very lucky and managed to save about forty 
assorted gliders which we trailed back to Oerlinghausen. Mark Twomey was 
the hero of the hour. On one trip he found the Horten IV tailless wonder and 
persuaded the Americans that, as the whole of the tail section was missing, 
they might as well let him have the rest as a souvenir. Little did they realise 
what a prize that flying wing was! Sadly in 1948 our Lords and Masters ordered 
that it should be handed over to the boffins at the Royal Aircraft Establishment 
Farnborough who soon afterwards had to give it to the Americans.
In the north of the British Zone, Nos. 83 and 84 Fighter Groups 2nd TAF 
had started their own gliding club at Salzgitter and very conveniently found an 
adjacent mine stuffed full of Grunau Babies and other gliders. We at 
Oerlinghausen came to envy them, for when we ran out of spare gliders, we 
had to repair ours whereas they just got another one 'out of stock'.
We adopted the well tried and tested German system of solo training which 
was great fun. As we were not allowed to use German flying instructors, we had 
to teach ourselves. Needless to say, we cheated and employed such 'Greats' 
as Pit van Husen who had been the boss of the famed Grunau Gliding Centre 
during the war, Tasso Proppe, Sepp Niederstadt, Paul Cardinal and that master 
of the 'squeeze box', Heinz Funk, as notional winch drivers and ground 
instructors. Some time later I felt rather sorry for them being deprived of their 
flying, so quite unofficially we let some of them take to the air.
Forty years later, when disguised as a Guernsey man crewing for David 
Innes at the World Championships in Wiener Neustadt in Austria, Fred 
Weinholtz of Oerlinghausen and German Aero Club fame introduced me to a 
group of old German glider pilots each sporting their pre-war dinner plate size 
Silver or Gold badges. Two came smartly to attention, clicked their heels, 
shook me warmly by the hand and thanked me for letting them fly back in 1946.
Pit Van Husen did get airborne before the others. A South African parachute 
major flying a Meise, the glider which had been designed by Hans Jacobs and

--- PAGE 14 ---
Chapter One - Early Days and Oerlinghausen__________________ 
17
chosen as the one-class type for the aborted 1940 Olympic Games and later 
built by France as the Nord 2000 and by Elliotts of Newbury in England as the 
Olympia, was struck by lightning just as he reached the top of his winch launch. 
The strike burnt through all the cables and Van Bearle parachuted successfully 
from only 750 feet, landing on terra firma albeit before the now pilotless Meise. 
The lightning charge sped down the winch cable, into the winch driven by Pit 
who was launched upwards to a height of some twenty feet. When he 
recovered he explained that in truth he preferred flying with wings!
Oerlinghausen was magnificent from every point of view. We could fly as 
much as we wanted, the site was a great thermal source, we employed superb 
German craftsmen who maintained our glider fleet and launching equipment 
beautifully. The social life was something else.
At the end of the war, sad to relate, the black market was king. Looking 
back on those halcyon days, it must be admitted that we played it for all we 
were worth and morality did not give us a moment's concern. A cigarette could 
be sold to tobacco-starved civilians for two shillings and sixpence; for us 
Servicemen a bottle of whisky cost only twelve shillings and bottles of Pol 
Roger Champagne even cheaper at eight shillings from the NAAFI stores. 
Once a week we would play poker and the winner had to stock the bar for the 
week. As our weekly cigarette ration was 200 Players or Senior Service and we 
were given a further 40 free Martins 'Non Throat' "nasties" by a shadowy group 
of well-wishers called The Friends of Overseas Servicemen' - the unofficial 
swap rate was four nasties for every decent cigarette. A week's ration stocked 
the bar very adequately for all eventualities.
Never fear, your sins will always find you out. On non-flying days it was 
easy to start the day with the hair of the dog and by lunch the Scotch Whisky 
Industry export drive was moved up another notch. One day our revered leader 
'Jacko' Jackson developed a very painful toothache. Stan Windibank and I took 
him to a local German dentist who refused to operate as the smell of whisky 
was too much for him. Not only did he report us to the authorities but we found 
out later that he was a rabid teetotaller.
Just north of the gliding site is the famous Teutoburger Wald, a low range 
of hills some seventy kilometres long rising to an average height of two 
hundred metres along which, on the 15 May 1929, Robert Kronfeld flying his 
Wien sailplane had established the world distance record of one hundred 
kilometres. For this feat he won the £250 prize offered by the Grune Post 
newspaper. He found it difficult to cross the gaps in the ridge until he 
remembered that on previous flights he had found up-currents under clouds 
and by waiting until suitable ones drifted across his track he was able to 
complete this epic cross-country. One of our 'Brown Jobs', a friendly though 
derogatory term applied to our Army members, called Ron Claudi, almost 
repeated this epic on 22 November 1946. He covered 53 km in 2 hours and 15 
minutes and found it equally difficult crossing the long gaps in the range. 
Although he was flying a Weihe, a modern glider of higher performance than

--- PAGE 15 ---
18 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
Kronfeld's Wien, the large gap in the hill east of Iburg could not be crossed 
without thermals. Years later Ron became Canadian Soaring Champion. At the 
eastern end of the range was the town of Detmold above which stands the 
Hermanns Denkmal, the large statue of a Germanic folk hero who defeated the 
Romans; and in the town was the Headquarters of the British Control 
Commission. We soon established very close and friendly relations with some 
of the officers who greatly appreciated the Oerlinghausen 'Dolce Vita' and, 
thanks to them, we were never short of an ample supply of nubile and very 
impressionable young secretaries eager to attend our parties.
After our dental escapade, the three musketeers running the Gliding Rest 
Centre were deemed unsuitable and while the other two were nearly time expired 
and due to be returned to civilian life, I was banished to Group Headquarters and 
made to edit the weekly Group Newspaper called Pinpoint. As a responsible 
Editor always looking for contestants for our 'Miss Sundern' beauty contest, it 
was obviously necessary to interview all new female personnel being posted to 
us. With that new source of talent we more than made up for the lack of the 
Detmold beauties for whom Oerlinghausen was now firmly placed 'off limits'.
We always claimed to have invented 'R & R' long before the American 
forces realised the morale boosting value of 'Rest and Recreation' and 
developed it into an art form.
This cavar was flown by fjiider from RAF Scgmpfcn 
to RAF Swinaarby on 16th December 1974, Trie 
East 
Midlands QiWIng 
CluS, iocatsd at RAF 
Swinderby, is th» only origins? EAFGSA club stiii 
active after 25 year®, and was at RAF Scamptur! untH 
Aorii 1956 when it rjwved to its present site.
SMat 
Kestra! IS motro Siii^lane iNo. 288) 
Pitel 
Flight Lieutanant D. S, L«J. RAF, 
Right Tiiaa 
18 minutes.
RiBht Lieutenant Lee was the winnur a! Ine 1S7< 
British Open Ciass National Gliding ChompiaDShips^ 
f^ing thy same gilder in which this cover was tsowrt. 
H8 is on« o! a sharMist nf «gh! piiots, Itoi-n wflich 
the next British team of folif w!!! t» s^acfaa !or the 
tfv 
.. 
.^ 
^ ^ 
1&76 World GH^insJ Championships, to U« heid in
aN:--^,-- :t."""""«r-^-H.^;r^>'-
25th Anniversary RAFGSA envelope. George Lee. three times World Champion

--- PAGE 16 ---
Chapter 2
More Oerlinghausen
F
or the vital two years before the end of the war our Air Officer Commanding 
2 Group was the wonderful and awe-inspiring Basil Embry. Air Chief 
Marshal Sir Basil Embry GCB, KCB, KBE, DSO with three bars, DFC, AFC 
and three Mentions in Dispatches had a brilliant Air Force career before the war 
and then a fantastic war. On the very day in May 1940 when he was supposed 
to take over RAF West Raynham as Station Commander, he decided to lead his 
Squadron on a last bombing sortie during which his Blenheim was shot down and 
he was captured. While escaping he had killed three of his guards which had not 
made him exactly popular in Germany. The extraordinary story of his escape is 
well worth reading and an excellent book called Wingless Victory by Anthony 
Richardson chronicles the whole dramatic event. Basil Embry was always the 
totally dedicated airman and even flew nineteen operations as 'Wing 
Commander Smith' when he was really an Air Vice Marshal. To get the full 
measure of the man you must read his autobiography Mission Completed.
At the end of the war, it was decided by the Air Ministry that, as the 
Germans had put a price on his head, he should not be allowed to take his 
Command to Germany and a new Air Officer Commanding was appointed. It 
was sad as everyone in the Group loved him but a number of us did rather well 
from his move. Basil was very fit and always kept himself in great shape. A 
famous pre-war West End interior decorator serving as a Squadron Leader at 
Headquarters had selected a splendid mansion in Gutersloh to serve as the 
A.O.C.'s residence and decided that the bathroom should have a sunken bath 
with mirrors covering all the walls. When our somewhat portly new boss man 
took his first bath and saw himself reflected in the mirrors, he ordered their 
removal and a number of quick thinking opportunists took full advantage of the 
situation. Two splendid full length dress mirrors graced our room from then on. 
By dint of Basil Embry's inspired leadership, 2 Group had a number of 
outstanding and remarkable senior officers all of whom had distinguished 
careers during and after the war. One day some of his former senior colleagues 
decided to have a small select reunion and chose Oerlinghausen as a suitably 
secure venue. Basil Embry was smuggled in and during the evening's 
entertainment various traditional RAF mess games were organised. To start 
proceedings, 'Are you there Captain Moriarty?' came first which calls for two 
blindfolded worthies lying on the floor each holding the other's left hand while 
clutching a rolled up newspaper in his right hand. On enquiring whether the 
said Captain is there, the first contestant has to gauge where the reply came 
from and deliver a smart blow to what he hopes is his opponent's head. Then 
it is the other man's turn. The successful blows to various parts of their bodies 
are counted and after a suitable period of time a winner is declared. Stone cold 
sober is not the best condition for battle; three parts or more to the wind makes 
it hugely enjoyable, especially for the onlookers.

--- PAGE 17 ---
20 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
2 Group, being a fighter/light bomber unit, the game of Bombers and Ack 
Ack Guns much played in Bomber Command messes was deemed unsuitable. 
We were very pleased as we were very short of the requisite equipment. Here 
a group designated as the Gunners are equipped with full soda water siphons, 
spaced evenly along the walls but they must lie flat on the floor. The Bombers, 
each holding a lighted candle in the tail gunner's position must cross the floor 
on all fours and try to reach the other end without being shot down.
However, High-cock-alorum, a proven method of breaking backs, furniture 
and spilling blood was followed by a cry for an old fashioned arse kicking 
contest. Now it so happens that there is an infamous 'Black Mac' somewhere in 
the Air Force. Who the original model was or indeed why he was so called is lost 
in the mists of time but every RAF pilot claims to have come up against him. We 
had our own candidate and Group Captain MacDonald was present that night 
as well as those splendid RAF twins- the Atcherley brothers-both then Air 
Commodores. A Pride of Unicorns by John Pudney chronicles their amazing 
progress in the Royal Air Force. Batchy, and his twin David, who was our Senior 
Staff Officer, were identical and could only be identified by their medal ribbons. 
Batchy immediately volunteered to start the proceedings with Black Mac as his 
opponent. Battle commenced and was fast and furious. Neither side was willing 
to admit defeat and after some time Batchy called for a short respite in order to 
make room for more drink which was allowed under the rules. After his pee 
break, he started again with renewed vigour and, after each similar short pause, 
returned to the fray seemingly fired up more than ever. My hero! What a man! It 
was only when visiting the holy of holies myself did I see one twin patiently 
sitting on the throne waiting for the other one to replace him. Black Mac never 
discovered and lost. Surprise, surprise. You cannot hold good men down and 
the Atcherley twins were undoubtedly two of the very best.
The next morning after a long night and a hearty breakfast we showed off our 
gliding activities and Batchy decided that he wanted to fly a Grunau Baby. This 
did not seem to be a good idea as he could only just fit into the small cockpit and 
a trip in the two seater Kranich was judged to be more appropriate. However 
"them what's down below" do not argue with "them what's up above" and thus he 
climbed into the Baby. With visions of disaster looming and with considerable 
misgivings I brought the cockpit collar down so forcefully that it caught the top of 
his head with the wooden cross member which thankfully snapped with a 
resounding bang and drew blood. "Damn it man" he shouted "are you trying to 
kill me?" He did not fly that day but later bought me a beer. It was a close call.
We followed the well proven German method of solo training. The student 
pilot was strapped on to a Primary SG38. This was an open frame device with 
wings and the pilot sat on a wooden seat totally exposed to the elements. To 
start he was given ground slides where the driver of the winch pulling him 
across the airfield ensured that the speed was kept down so that the glider 
remained firmly on the ground. When the pilot had mastered the technique of 
keeping his wings level while still on the ground, the speed was increased to

--- PAGE 18 ---
Chapter Two - More Oerlinghausen
21
allow for low hops. High hops followed and completing seven or eight launches 
in total including a half turn to the left and then to the right gained him his 'B' 
certificate. Circuits followed and thereafter he was promoted by being allowed 
to fly the SG38 with a fairing called The Boot' round the nose. No longer did 
he look past his feet at the ground which, although an improvement for the 
student, did rather remove the fun of flying this primitive machine. Some dual 
flights in the Kranich were carried out during this learning period, promotion to 
the Grunau Baby followed. By then he could call himself a glider pilot.
For the instructors it was heaven. Apart from flying the Kranich, when a pupil 
landed the SG38 half-way down the field, we would have a fast short winch 
launch from there, execute a swift 180 degree turn, fly downwind and land back 
at the take-off point. For high performance flying we had a number of Meises, 
Weihes (Hans Jacobs' earlier design), a Mu 13, a Rheinland with retractable 
landing gear and the gull wing ultra-stable Minimoa, surely one of the most 
beautiful gliders ever built. Before the war Philip Wills flying his Minimoa was the 
first pilot in Britain to achieve the Gold 'C' distance flight of 300 km.
The sport of gliding is one which brings out the best in people and 
encourages human development especially in the young. Yet gliding also 
appeals to the loner, the introverted as well as the extroverted and we certainly 
had our share of the latter.
It does not seem proper to describe some of our main players nor would I 
want to fall foul of our laws of libel but one stands out in the nicest possible way. 
John, known to all as 'Clue' as he always knew better, was a tall young Army 
2nd Lieutenant. He is a lovely man but very prone to putting both feet firmly into 
his mouth. Rank was ignored on the gliding field and the launch point Controller 
was second only to the Duty Instructor. When gliders landed, the Controller 
encouraged other pilots to bring them back to the launch point. Having been well 
taught by our German friends who believed in hard work being the key to 
pleasure, Grunau Babies were retrieved by two pilots who would position 
themselves one under each wing and carry the glider back. An arduous task at 
the best of times and pilots who landed well down the field were very unpopular.
Hard work is the key to pleasure

--- PAGE 19 ---
22 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
Our most senior pupil at that time was General Pip Roberts who made up 
in modesty and charm what he lacked in physical stature. Clue shouted at him 
to retrieve a Grunau, a command which Pip did not hear. John stormed over to 
him and gave him the father and mother of all rockets. When he was finished, 
Pip quietly asked who the young gentleman was. When told, he turned to Clue 
and said very gently "I understand that you are a 2nd Lieutenant. I am a 
General. I really would expect you to finish off with Sir!" and with that started 
walking towards the Grunau. We fell about laughing when we saw Clue running 
to overtake him shouting "Sir, I will carry it for you, Sir.
There are many stories about Clue then and later. The best was when he 
was a graduate management trainee in a famous Midlands brewery of which 
his father was a Director, and he was found lying under a barrel with the tap 
slightly open so that a steady trickle of beer could enter his mouth without his 
having to exert himself, just as all the Directors and the principal shareholders 
were making a tour of inspection. John is now a Baronet and the very model of 
propriety - mores the pity.
Another worthy was 'Freddie' who was large, dark, sported a splendid 
handle bar moustache and had a very hairy chest. He was a dashing Observer 
on Mosquitoes and wore his 'O' half wing Observer's brevet with great pride. 
When the Air Ministry decreed that 'O' brevets were to be replaced by 'N' for 
Navigator, Freddie took umbrage and categorically refused to comply. Things 
got very fraught when the Station Commander told Freddie that unless he did 
as ordered, hell and damnation would follow. Freddie decided to hide out at 
Oerlinghausen. One night during a party we decided to lend a hand and 
shaved off one side of his moustache, his chest and all the way down to his 
ankle. At first he was not too pleased but suddenly realised that out of defeat 
could come victory. The next morning he returned to his Station for breakfast, 
went about his squadron navigation duties as usual and it was not until lunch 
when the Group Captain walked into the mess and was asked by Freddie for 
one of the new Brevets to go with his new image that honour was satisfied.
The second time events proved that adrenalin is brown was when on 2 June 
1947, Bob 'Peasant' Williams and I had just climbed in cloud to all of 8,400 feet 
in a Kranich which surprisingly established a new British two seater height 
record, the first by members of a RAF Gliding club since the war. We were 
cavorting in and out of cloud without a care in the world except that both of us 
desperately wanted to smoke. As my cigarettes were in my trousers, Bob was 
required to fly nice and gently and especially straight and level as I would have 
to unstrap myself and fiddle about in my pocket. While doing just that, Peasant 
suddenly spotted another glider on a close collision course and shoved the stick 
violently fully forward and to the right. Neither God nor the Devil wanted me that 
day and I was just able to hang on in the cockpit - but only just! Another valuable 
lesson learnt, always make certain that all your life support items such as food, 
sweets, water and fags are readily to hand before take-off.

--- PAGE 20 ---
Chapter Two - More Oerlinghausen_____________________________23
Some of the Oerlinghausen fleet - Rheinland, Weihe. Mul7, Minimoa, Meise, Grunau Baby. SG 38
By May 1947, the now four RAF gliding clubs in Germany decided that it 
was time to stage a competition. The contestants from each club were divided 
into two teams, 'A' for experts and 'B' for amateurs and with all the talent we 
had at Oerlinghausen. I just scraped into our 'B' team. Some weeks before the 
start we had ordered a new trailer for a Weihe from a factory in the very south 
of Germany. We needed it urgently and had been promised prompt delivery but 
repeated phone calls to the makers proved less than satisfactory. Then by 
chance a visitor from the Salzgitter mob whom we regarded as a crowd of 
cowboys told us gleefully that one of their members had bribed the factory 
manager to delay collection until after the contest so that we could only field 
one Weihe against their two. Less than sporting we thought.
On the day before the start, Tasso Proppe and I jumped into our somewhat 
clapped out Mercedes and sped south driving like the wind. When we arrived 
at the factory located in a small village, we found it locked and no one around 
to help. By dint of much bribery and veiled threats of reprisals against the 
village by RAF bombers, we got our shiny new trailer. On the way back both of 
us were fit to drop and decided that we should pick up two hitch-hikers who 
would have to ensure that we did not fall asleep. We saw two young persons 
of the female gender who seemed admirably suited for our needs and quickly 
took them on board. Almost at once we got our come-uppance-they had 
obviously just taken part in the World garlic-eating competition and the pong 
was indescribable. At the very next Autobahn exit we threw them out but the 
stench they left behind kept us fully alert for the rest of the journey.
Unlike modern Championships, our rules were very simple. Each day pilots 
could take off when they liked and the winners were marked on distance flown. 
On the penultimate day we laid on a 'maxi' Oerlinghausen party and much 
merriment ensued which continued until first light. The last day dawned grey and 
overcast and everyone stayed in bed. At 10 O'clock nature called me fairly 
urgently and having got up, it seemed sensible to go to the launch point to see

--- PAGE 21 ---
24 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
if anything was happening. In next to no time someone strapped me into my 
Meise and we soon found some very weak lift. My log book shows a flight of 23 
minutes, enough to rush back to our clubhouse and very quietly wake up only 
our pilots. They all launched and flew-cross country before the weather closed 
in but our total distance of thirty kilometres won us second place with the hated 
Saltzgitter entry coming third. Revenge is sweet-let no-one tell you otherwise!
For many months before the contest our craftsmen had been busy repairing 
and preparing the Horten IV flying wing. We invited the designer Reimar Horten 
and his chief test pilot Heinz Scheidhauer to Oerlinghausen together with 
Hanna Reitsch so that they could hopefully pass it airworthy and Scheidhauer 
to fly it. It was a fantastic moment when he donned his little white flying helmet 
which looked for all the world like a swimming cap, pushed the goggles on to 
his forehead and prepared to lie face down in the glider. Wearing goggles even 
in an enclosed cockpit was a safety precaution he had learnt the hard way. In 
1938 during the International Contest at the Wasserkuppe, he and other pilots 
were caught in a vicious thunderstorm. He was forced to bail out of the Horten 
3 he was flying and his barograph showed that he had successfully opened his 
parachute in violent lift that had, on four occasions taken him up to heights of 
over 25,000 feet. He was found unconscious in a tree hanging from his 
parachute harness. He was badly frost bitten and had blacked out through lack 
of oxygen. When his mother saw him in hospital she could not recognise him. 
He eventually recovered, losing several fingers to frostbite in the process, and 
continued to fly tailless aircraft with the Hortens for many years. In those days, 
pilots attached their barographs to themselves and the trace confirmed his 
extraordinary ordeal. Some other pilots who were caught in the storm were not 
so fortunate. He was a quiet, modest and lovely man who only got excited 
when I pulled his leg about his Silver 'C' badge which looked as if someone had 
painted a few flecks of gold paint on it. With a hurt expression on his face he 
said "I have made the Golden height seven times in tailless gliders and the 
Golden distance three times". I never did learn the wisdom of discretion!
After putting on his backpack parachute, he climbed into the Horten. The 
pilot lies on his stomach, his chin resting on a leather pad and his feet on 
pedals behind him. Only fairly small pilots could fit into the cockpit and take-off 
was full of drama. Captain Eric 'Winkle' Brown, the former Chief Naval Test 
Pilot and Commanding Officer of the renowned Aerodynamics Flight at the 
Royal Aircraft Establishment Farnborough describes his flights in the Horten IV 
in his book, Wings of the Weird & Wonderful. The flying demonstration we laid 
on for our visitors impressed them as much as it did us.
The following year, Jock Forbes, the Chief Instructor of Saltzgitter flew it with 
hilarious results. Dr Horten, ever mindful of the pilot 'comfort' requirement had 
provided a pee-tube built into the fuselage design. However it was essential that 
the pilot before being strapped down took advantage of the fitting and offered up 
his vital part in the obvious manner. This Jock did more as a giggle as he was 
not planning to stay up very long. However on take-off a small leather cover on

--- PAGE 22 ---
Chapter Two — More Oerlinghausen 
25
the outside end of the pipe fell off and a substantial suction was created due to 
the venturi effect. On landing Jock's comment was "Apart of the extreme 
discomfort I do not know whether to be pleased or sorry!" Jock later flew for 
Britain in the 1948 World Championships held in Samedan, Switzerland and on 
leaving the Royal Air Force, emigrated to America where sometime later he 
edited Soaring, the official magazine of the Soaring Society of America.
In June 1947, the Association of BAFO (British Armed Forces of 
Occupation) gliding Clubs decided to enter a team in the forthcoming British 
National Gliding Championship to be held at the Royal Naval Air Station HMS 
Gamecock at Bramcote, Nuneaton, just north of Coventry. The journey from 
Oerlinghausen, on to Saltzgitter in the north and then through Brussels to the 
coast was full of incidents though the highlight was undoubtedly our stop in the 
beautiful town square in Brussels at five in the morning. We found a cafe just 
opening and demanded food. "Ham and eggs O.K.?" asked the Patron. The 
Belgians quite liked the RAF, after all we had presented their famous statue 
'Manneken Pis' with a Flight Sergeant Pilot's uniform - quite the funniest 
parade ever for when the Mayor of Brussels unveiled him suitably clad and the 
water was turned on, the RAF contingent present burst out laughing and did 
not appreciate the solemnity of the occasion.
"How many eggs" asked the man. "Twenty four each" shouted our 
Rhodesian Flight Lieutenant Dave Hughes. It seemed only fair that we forced 
him to eat a second twenty four egg omelette to make amends but in truth three 
of us kept him company. Forty-eight eggs later as we were pushing the trailers 
somewhat precariously along railway lines on to the ship, I fell down between 
the dock and the side of the boat and was saved just in time by two dockers 
grabbing my arms. As I write I can hear voices saying "Damn fool dockers, if 
only they had let him go."
We resolved to show London that the RAF gliding team had arrived. Driving 
round Parliament Square in convoy was impressive but when we hit Piccadilly 
Circus at 6 pm on Friday at the height of the rush hour, the effect was hilarious. A 
circle of covered wagons to fight Indians is one thing but four Jeeps and their long 
trailers surrounding the statue of Eros which in those days was in the centre of the 
Circus is something else. Police reaction was almost the same as four years later 
when members of the Surrey Club circumnavigated Eros with an open tipper truck 
while we took it in turns to play the very out of tune upright piano that it bore.
The Nationals were great fun. The Chief Marshal was Frank Reade who 
had just returned to the UK after his stint as officer in charge of Oerlinghausen 
so that we had a real friend at court. Twenty-six gliders, an entrance fee of 
three guineas (three pounds and three shillings) with an extra 10 shillings if 
more than two pilots were nominated to fly. As only Philip Wills (who finally 
won) and Lome Welch of the Surrey Club were flying Weihes, then the hottest 
ships around, we reckoned that with our four Weihes we should do reasonably 
well. We realised how extremely lucky we were as most of the other 
competitors had started flying before the war and had to fight hard to re-create

--- PAGE 23 ---
26 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
their gliding clubs most of which had been stripped of their equipment and 
even, as in the case of the London Gliding Club at Dunstable, their site. We 
tried, though not always successfully, not to lord it over the less fortunate pilots 
with their somewhat less than perfect equipment. The report of the 'Comps' in 
the August 1947 issue of Sailplane & Glider is a gem and must rate with the 
worst of the worst, or how not to do it.
One day I was standing in front of the prototype Slingsby T.21 two-seater 
when a small female who was also enthralled by this new monster engaged 
me in conversation. "How would you like to be a turning point observer? I hear 
that the organisers are rather short of people". With all the dignity I could 
muster I explained that I was a crew chief, had a Silver 'C' - still fairly rare in 
those days - and who the hell was she anyway? That was my first meeting 
with Ann Welch (then Ann Douglas) and in all the years I have known her she 
has not changed. Full marks to her, get volunteers even if you have to press 
gang them. But more of 'La Tigresse' later.
On one occasion, our pilot, Wing Commander 'Prosser' Hanks, landed in a 
hamlet called Grafton Underwood. When the crew arrived, we were stopped 
outside the place by the local policeman who insisted that we follow him. Much 
to our surprise we were led directly to the 'Pig and Whistle' (the local pub) and 
there was Prosser surrounded by locals with a large number of pints of beer in 
front of him. More pints were quickly produced for us and after five or six pints 
no amount of effort on our part would persuade the locals to release us from 
this very pleasant captivity. Eventually we won and were ceremoniously 
escorted to the glider. All became clear when we saw that the local football 
team had roped it off and were charging interested spectators a fortune just to 
look at it. How we got home that night without hitting anything is still one of life's 
great mysteries. The next day Prosser flew but only just managed three miles. 
We should have stayed, it had the makings of a monumental thrash.
On the final day the then Minister of Aviation, a portly Socialist lawyer called 
Lord Nathan, was wheeled up to present the prizes. A flying demonstration was 
arranged in his honour and during the course of its two well known Air Training 
Corps Instructors flew a Slingsby Gull II with great panache finishing up with a 
splendid prang slap in front of the VIP which very effectively reduced the two- 
seater to matchwood. His Lordship was most impressed and thanked the 
organisation for laying on such an inspiring demonstration crash landing for his 
benefit. It does seem extraordinary that in successive post war Governments, the 
Ministerial pecking order ensured that Ministers of Aviation never understood our 
activities. It proves that we have to be ever alert and ensure that we fight to 
preserve our freedoms against the machinations of those we respectfully (?) call 
our 'Lords and Masters'. Our main European competitors appear to be far better 
served by their elected representatives and are rewarded by official recognition 
and financial help. The first post-war British Gliding Championships were a great 
success though only four days proved flyable. The twentysix gliders together with 
two Swiss hors concours entrants flew a total of 4,376 miles. In those carefree

--- PAGE 24 ---
Chapter Two - More Oerlinghausen____________________________27
pre-GPS days, distance measuring was not the exact science it is today. The 
entry list reads like a roll of honour of the 'Greats' of pre-war glider pilots with only 
the young RAF whippersnappers who secured 3rd, 4th and 20th places opening 
the door for the next generation of competitors to come.
Unfortunately I did not return to Germany with the team and thus missed an 
action-packed journey back to base. An immediate posting to the BAFO RAF 
Headquarters to edit the weekly Command newspaper was not welcome as it 
would undoubtedly interfere with gliding. Quite fortuitously, this assignment did 
not last too long as I managed to blot my copybook most effectively. It so 
happened that in Buckeberg there was a Schloss which was owned by some 
distant relations of our Royal Family. One night this imposing edifice caught fire 
and as many airmen as could be found were brought in to rescue anything of 
value from the blaze. Needless to say a number of them soon discovered the 
well stocked wine cellar and quickly found that there were far too many bottles 
and it was much more efficient to empty a number before making the perilous 
and exhausting journey up the hundreds of stairs to the outside world. After a 
number of these sorties some airmen were quite 'tired' and felt the need to lie 
down on the grass where it was even easier to sample the precious nectar.
The entire editorial staff of the BAFO Times consisting of a Photographer 
and the Editor arrived in time to record a very irate Assistant Provost Marshal, 
one Wing Commander Harry Stonard, pointing at each drunken airman and 
putting him on a charge. Quite naturally he did not take kindly to our activities 
and when we explained that our pictures of the fire were fairly commonplace 
but our action shots of him would make a superb story which we hoped would 
make the British National press, he ordered us to leave at once but first tried 
unsuccessfully to get hold of our film. He complained to higher authority and all 
three of us were swiftly moved to other duties. By a strange coincidence, much 
later Harry and I were colleagues in the tobacco industry and he agreed to 
forgive me for the incident. For me it was a blessing in disguise because it 
enabled me to spend the last six months in the Service gliding virtually full time, 
first at Mindeheide and then at Scharfholdendorf.

--- PAGE 25 ---
_________Chapter 3
Mindeheide and 
Scharfholdendorf
O
n arriving at Mindeheide, a flat site in the Minden gap, I was 
immediately taken to task by one Group Captain Christopher Paul, a 
very forceful and gallant former 2 Group Mosquito Squadron 
Commander who had taken charge of all gliding in the Command. We had met 
before when, soon after arriving in Germany, he had visited us at 
Oerlinghausen and had taken a launch in our very special Weihe which we had 
'buffed up' ready for the forthcoming British Nationals at Bramcote. As he had 
never before experienced a 'centre of gravity' launch (where the winch cable is 
attached to a hook well down the fuselage which enables the pilot to climb very 
steeply), it was deemed prudent to use the nose hook which generally 
produced a pathetic launch. This did not work out as it should and he, the 
Weihe and the ground met in a manner not befitting the new boss of all gliding. 
Our beautiful Weihe - we were not best pleased and in truth neither was he! 
He quite correctly assessed the state of play in our little world and announced 
that changes for the better would be made. He then left to leave us to 
contemplate the fact that life would never be the same again.
"You work here, teaching pilots to fly. Very few thermals to distract you, so 
get on with it" he said. It was solo training supervision with two-seater checks in 
the Kranich whenever possible. We made our pupils sweat and each newcomer 
before starting his training was made to produce forty feet of tacking strips which 
were used to secure scarf joints during repairs. They had to cut long narrow 
strips of plywood and gently hammer in small nails every three inches along 
their length. It says a lot for our training methods that after a few months we had 
enough to keep the world gliding movement sated for the rest of time.
The womenfolk, who in those pre-politically correct days were called 'Camp 
followers' now more kindly described as 'Gliding Widows', were pressed into 
sandwich and tea-making and kept us happy. One of my young pupils was a 
motor mechanic Corporal called Andy Gough who had a severe linguistic 
communication problem with his German girl friend Trudie. As she was our 
champion sandwich maker, I was pressed into service as their interpreter and 
had to persuade Andy to learn German so that he could communicate in time 
for the forthcoming arrival of young Andy. In the mid-eighties, young Andy 
became the Canadian soaring champion, which would have delighted his 
father who was sadly killed on 12 June 1981 at Brize Norton in a tragic gliding 
accident while giving one of his fabulous aerobatic displays. 'Old' Andy Gough 
developed into one of the 'Greats' of British gliding. From 1948 until his death, 
he was the charismatic Chief Gliding Instructor of various BAFO and Royal Air

--- PAGE 26 ---
30 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
Force Gliding and Soaring Association clubs and eventually made the RAF 
centre at Bicester his personal fiefdom of excellence and performance. With 
Derek Piggott, he rates as the very best instructor to whom countless glider 
pilots owe an enormous debt of gratitude. Andy was an entrepreneur par 
excellence, always looking for a deal from which he invariably came out on top. 
An American friend of mine who had been cheated by a less than honest art 
dealer said philosophically "If you are landed with lemons, you've got to make 
lemonade!" When I told Andy the story he said "Never happened to me, just as 
well, I don't like lemonade". He treated everyone the same, regardless of their 
rank and was universally loved by all who came into his world.
Mindeheide was hard work, satisfying and fun. Chris Paul came up with 
some strange ideas, one of which was to fit a loudspeaker on the frame of the 
open SG38 above the pupil's head so that we could radio instructions to him in 
the air. Thankfully the scheme never got off the ground as we could never make 
the radio work. After a few weeks a rare opportunity to fly a Grunau came my 
way and my request to attempt a cross-country to my old club was met with 
considerable derision from certain quarters. It was with great pleasure when 
later that day we telephoned from Oerlinghausen requesting a retrieve.
Scharfholdendorf, also known as 'Der Ith', was something else. A fantastic 
hilltop site, the main ridge is an outcrop of limestone over twelve miles long 
which you could hill-soar on both sides. The West ridge is over 600 feet high 
for most of its length and was certainly the most spectacular and one of the 
finest ridges you could hope to find anywhere in the world. The Germans had 
built a splendid holiday complex on top complete with swimming pool, tennis 
courts and all the comforts of home. A gliding club completed the amenities. On 
the main side of the hill they had even built a light railway so that gliders landing 
in the valley below could be put on a trolley and winched back up to the top. 
Unfortunately, at the time of the great Kranich destruction party by the zealous 
official vandals, the railway had suffered the same fate as the gliders. When our 
pupils were deemed competent pilots, they transferred from the flat site at 
Mindeheide to the much more challenging narrow strip at Scharfholdendorf. 
When the west wind was strong, we used a very short launch run at a right 
angle to the hill. On light wind days the winch cable was laid out along the hill.
Early on Chris Paul decided to organise the first BAFO Instructors course 
so that training methods could be standardised, which very nearly ended my 
gliding career prematurely. He sat in the front seat of the Kranich and yours 
truly was ordered to fly him round acting as the Instructor. On landing he 
seemed satisfied and insisted that we swap roles and seats. When we landed 
he asked for my comments and joking I suggested that he needed to have 
more dual. Yet another valuable lesson learnt the hard way - humour should 
be severely restrained when dealing with senior officers.
We taught advanced flying in the Kranich which included aerobatics. We 
gave aerobatic displays at the weekends to entertain the multitude who used 
the rest centre for various recreational activities and to attract new members. If

--- PAGE 27 ---
Chapter Three — Mindeheide and Scharfholdendorf 
________ ______31
the wind was on the hill it allowed you to do repeated very low passes over the 
swimming pool and tennis courts which stood you in good stead later with 
highly impressionable young ladies. Apart from loops, spins and chandelles 
one popular manoeuvre was the full blown tail slide in a Kranich or Grunau 
Baby. Why and how we never had a single case of elevator hinge or total glue 
failure is a mystery. It is a stupid thing to do and attempted today in modern 
gliders would certainly result in the pilot being thrown out of the Brownies!
One problem, we never overcame no matter what we did. Every Kranich was 
equipped with an undercarriage consisting of two wheels and a short axle which 
was attached to the fuselage by two lugs. By pushing a small lever in the 
cockpit, the pilot could jettison this on take-off and land on the skid which 
resulted in a shortened landing run. We hated having to lift the back of the 
fuselage in order to relocate the wheels and tended to fly with them on. 
Inevitably some visitors or pupils in moments of slight panic would push the 
lever and away would go the wheels. Some four hours after a glorious hill 
soaring flight during which one of those infuriating twits had dropped our wheels 
from a height of three thousand feet, a German farmer arrived at the site and 
explained that he was ploughing one of his fields when he heard a 'bomp'. He 
looked up but saw nothing so he went back to work. Soon after there was 
another 'bomp' and again he saw nothing. Then there were lots of 'bomps' and 
to and behold at his feet was the undercarriage. He explained that he was quite 
used to finding Kranich wheels on his farm and added that before and during the 
war he was always rewarded with a bottle of Steinhager. As he was wearing the 
most fabulous hat, we soon did a deal. He went off happy with two bottles of 
whisky and I acquired our wheels and the thermal hat of all time which was worn 
on every flight until someone pinched it during the 1955 Nationals.
On the 13 September 1947 the weather looked superb with lots of tight 
cumulus clouds over the site which showed promise of building into big ones in 
the afternoon. The Group Captain had telephoned to tell us that he would come 
after lunch and to reserve our only serviceable Weihe. Past experience had 
taught us that you did not willingly cross our revered leader and so at 13.15 
hours I took a launch in a Grunau Baby which was not equipped with any blind 
flying instruments. I sat above the site, cursing my luck when at last after an 
hour I saw the staff car arrive, drive straight past the launch point and on to the 
middle of the woods beyond the site, a place which was tailor made for other 
forms of sport. Hoping that himself and friend would probably be happily 
engaged for some time, I opened the dive brakes, landed near the Weihe, 
jumped in and took off. After just over an hour I was back on the ground being 
given a monumental rocket by an irate Group Captain for pinching his glider. 
When the storm had blown itself out, I meekly produced the barograph which 
showed an 11,000 foot climb which was enough for our first Gold 'C' height and 
promised that it would never happen again. In fairness he was very good about 
it but it was just as well that my demobilisation date was only three months away.

--- PAGE 28 ---
32 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
My last flight was back at Oerlinghausen and that night and the two next 
ones for good measure a number of us leaving the Service were dined out in 
great and very liquid style. No one can hope to go to Heaven twice. I was lucky 
- the previous two and half years was the first visit. The next was to start on 
20th December 1947 in the red Slingsby Cadet above Dunstable Downs in 
Bedfordshire and has continued ever since.

--- PAGE 29 ---
_____________Chapter 4
Dunstable and Redhill
The Sailplanes taken from The Trackless Way 
by Leonard Taylor:
How gentle are the sailplanes
They do not crash or burn
Much cheaper than the mailplanes
And easier to team
And silent over Dunstable's long hills they go in flight
Like sleepy rural constables
Patrolling through the night
O
n a short duty trip to England in August 1947 time allowed a quick visit 
to the Surrey Gliding Club site at Redhill aerodrome. At that time the 
Surrey Club had a fleet consisting of a Cadet, a Tutor, four Olympias 
and a Weihe and the presiding genius as resident Chief Instructor was Lome 
Welch. P.P.L.E. Welch was one of nature's genuine characters. A relation by 
marriage had been the great practical joker Horace de Vere Cole who indulged 
in numerous splendid japes. One was to stand on a corner of a building near 
the Bank of England in the City of London and stop a proper 'City Gent' - in 
those far off days wearing a dark suit, white shirt, stiff collar, bowler hat, gloves 
and carefully rolled umbrella. He would explain that he was measuring the 
building and asked whether said 'Gent' could just hold the end of his tape 
measure whilst he went round the corner. He would then find another volunteer 
to hold the other end. He then crossed to the opposite side of the road and 
watched to see how long they stood their ground. He once succeeded in 
having three buildings being 'measured' at the same time! His most famous act 
was to dress up as the Sultan of Zanzibar and successfully persuaded the 
Admiralty to arrange for him to review the Fleet lying off Spithead. Apparently 
when they discovered the truth, their Lordships were less than pleased.
The stories about Lome, told by him or of him are all true and most 
amusing. His wife Ann should be persuaded to write his biography so that 
future generations will be able to read about his fascinating life.
At the start of the war he was a flying instructor in the RAF and one day was 
detailed to ferry a Tiger Moth from an airfield in Scotland to Brough in the North 
of England. On the way, he decided to break his journey and visit some family 
friends. He landed in a field near their house and after being given tea by his 
host was persuaded to stay the night. A maid took his sparse luggage to a 
bedroom and when he went up to change for dinner he found that she had 
quite properly laid out his clothes but was obviously fooled by the parachute. 
She had taken it out of the bag and carefully placed it on a chair with the straps 
decorously draped over the side.
After a long stint instructing, he managed to join Bomber Command only to

--- PAGE 30 ---
34 
A Glider PUot Bold...
be shot down soon after. The story of his escape with Walter Morison from their 
prison camp, and of the famous tunnel in Stalag Luft III and then Colditz are fully 
chronicled in Walter's book Flak and Ferrets; it is very well worth reading. The 
Surrey Club was a thriving vibrant organisation and on handing over a cheque 
my membership was accepted there and then. I asked Lome if there was 
anything he wanted which could be 'liberated' and brought back from Germany. 
As he was dreaming of designing the perfect winch which he had decided to 
build and later completed, he asked for the rollers, paying on gear and guillotine 
mechanism off a Pfeiffer winch. Five months later, having carried the heavy 
crate back which meant leaving a 56 piece Furstenberg dinner service behind 
as we were severely limited in how much 'loot' could be brought home, I arrived 
in the middle of the Surrey Club Christmas party which was in full swing in the 
clubhouse. With great aplomb the crate of goodies was deposited on the floor 
in front of Lome. "Hi, here is what you wanted" I said and waited expectantly for 
his reaction. "Oh, what's that then" he asked and then added "just put it in a 
corner somewhere". No word of thanks or appreciation. The very next day in a 
childish pique, I drove to Dunstable and joined the London Gliding Club. Today 
I know better. Lome was quite right, why thank someone for doing something for 
the common good, just doing it is enough reward.
Surrey and London Clubs could not have been more different in attitude. The 
Surrey Club had been joined in 1947 by the Imperial College of Science and 
Technology Gliding Club which was established in 1930 and is thus the oldest 
University Club in the country. Apart from a few notables, the members at 
Redhill were predominantly pilots who were too young to have flown before or 
during the war and satisfied their burning ambition to fly by learning to glide as 
power flying, although much cheaper than today, was beyond their meagre 
financial means. Thus the spirit and general 'get up and go' attitude to gliding 
and life in general together with a cross-country flying culture actively 
encouraged and fostered by Lome Welch was very stimulating. Two innovations 
of his which were much admired and later copied by some other clubs were the 
introduction of dual training and then first solos in 'Daisy' our Slingsby T.21 and 
the very popular 'cry Joe' scheme. At the start of the season, every soaring pilot 
was given the opportunity of selecting a specified date on which an Olympia or 
even our flagship the Weihe could be booked all day. If the Gods smiled on the 
day selected, the fortunate 'Joe' could attempt a cross-country or just use the 
aircraft for local soaring. In those days before private ownership became the 
fashion it taught us all a valuable lesson in task selection and decision making.
The London Club at Dunstable on the other hand still had a large number 
of pre-war pilots and the Committee found it difficult to understand the attitude 
and aspirations of the young. Even noisy social activities were discouraged and 
were felt not to be in keeping with their rather staid outlook. Slope soaring up 
and down the Dunstable ridge seemed to be favoured by most of the pilots and 
flying cross-country was a comparative rarity. A few years later however, Frank 
Foster by his example actively encouraged members to fly cross-country. His

--- PAGE 31 ---
Chapter Four - Dunstable and Redhill____________________________35
simple message was "if there are thermals over the site, then there will be 
thermals further away, so go and find them!" Frank, a Captain flying for British 
European Airways, was Nick Goodhart's co-pilot in the 1956 World 
Championships held in France when they became the World Two-Seater 
Gliding Champions. Very sadly he was killed when his airliner on a flight near 
Italy was torn apart by a military fighter aircraft. Much later John Jefferies, then 
the Chief instructor at Dunstable pioneered the 'lead and follow' cross-country 
training scheme, where flying a two-seater with a pupil, he led other pilots flying 
single seaters on declared tasks. This has proved to be an excellent system 
designed to give greater confidence and to improve the skills of younger pilots.
To digress, before winches were adopted as the preferred and the most 
effective method of launching, the bungey reigned supreme. The glider was 
perched on the edge of the hill and a ring was placed round a hook under the 
nose. Two thick rubber shock cords attached to short ropes were then pulled 
tight by the bungey crew of four people on each side forming a V and on the 
command 'walk' they would start off down the hill until the bungey was nearly 
fully stretched and after the shout of 'run' when the bungey was fully stretched, 
the glider shot off into the wide blue yonder. For the pilot it was always a magic 
moment, for the crew it was very hard work. Pulling the glider back up the hill 
for the next pilot was even harder work and some clubs including the 
Dunstablites found horses very effective for this purpose. One day a bright 
spark suggested using the horses as the bungey crew as volunteers were hard 
to find. The slope is not very steep, horses don't pay an annual subscription so 
they thought they'd give it a go. Horses do not understand plain English and 
soon found themselves going downhill rather fast. Before anyone could stop 
them, the bungey broke and each horse was hit smartly on his rear with a 
resounding crack. Story has it that it took Tim Hervey the Chief instructor three 
days before he found and retrieved the horses from quite a distance away. A 
pulley system was soon substituted and was found to be much more reliable, 
providing that the look-out' man remembered to shout 'stop' before the glider 
reached the pulley at the top of the hill.
Like all gliding clubs, Dunstable had its share of colourful characters. One 
stands out above all the others and as the result of one of his exploits has given 
a name to a grass field. He is Archie Erskine, a famed psychiatrist who was ever 
eager to fly. Very early one bright morning with the wind blowing on the hill, he 
persuaded a fellow member to give him a winch launch well before any of the 
others had even left their warm beds. Clad only in his pyjamas, off he went to 
soar the hill. Making his way down to the Whipsnade Zoo end of the ridge, he 
flew happily for a time until, suddenly, the wind dropped. With no hope of getting 
back to the site, he landed in a suitable field, walked to the nearest house to 
telephone the club. On being woken by loud banging on her front door and 
confronted by a man dressed only in his pyjamas was not the way to make 
friends and influence people. Smartly banging the door in his face, she 
telephoned the police demanding protection. It was only after Archie had shown

--- PAGE 32 ---
36 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
the lady of the house and the local policeman his glider, that he was able to 
telephone for a retrieve. To this day, that field is called The Pyjama Field'.
Archie was also determined to complete his 300km distance flight for the 
coveted 'Gold C' badge. Always declaring Plymouth airfield in Devon as his 
goal, on his numerous abortive attempts he must have landed in every field on 
track within 30 miles of Dunstable. It was the standing joke that whenever the 
telephone rang in the clubhouse, people would shout "It must be Archie, where 
has he landed now?" One cloudless day when hardly anyone bothered to get 
airborne, off went Archie and many hours later telephoned having reached his 
goal at last. The story has it that he hardly climbed higher than 2,000 feet over 
the whole distance. Quite a man.
Even newly joining trained glider pilots were required to fly at least five 
hours in Cadets and Tutors before being considered for anything of better 
performance. It was a joy to visit Redhill to be able to fly Olympias and the 
Weihe. Later at Dunstable, Dan Smith, then the Chairman of the Flying 
Committee, took pity on me and ordered their somewhat strange Resident 
Instructor Hugh Wheatcroft to let me fly anything and to start instructing as well. 
My log book records flights in various gliders including the tiny Baynes Scud II 
which has a wing span of 12.9 metres, an empty weight of 68kg and when new 
in 1932 cost £150 ex-works Farnham, Surrey. As I was still quite slim, though 
tall, getting into the Scud was a difficult exercise which, fifty odd years later at 
almost twice the weight of the glider would be downright laughable. The Zlin 
Krajanek, an up to date aerobatic Czech design loosely based on the Grunau 
Baby, in which Ladi Marmol established the British Duration record on the hill 
at Dunstable of over 33 hours, was a joy to fly. The highlight was undoubtedly 
taking Joan Price's sister and Joan's young daughter for an hour's hill soaring 
in the prototype T.21 affectionately called The Barge' which had a cockpit large 
enough to hold the three of us. In today's regulated and very protective society, 
this caper would not be allowed under any circumstances.
Gliding, the sport of silent flight is magic. Everyone should try it. Flying in 
an open cockpit machine on a glorious summer's day is sheer bliss, cavorting 
with soaring birds and occasionally meeting the odd butterfly which has been 
taken aloft by a column of warm rising air, the life blood of all soaring 
aficionados; but one does have to remember that voices carry. Once flying with 
the beautiful Diana, I suggested a loop in the T.21. Panic stricken at the thought 
she shouted "No, Wally No!". Convincing friends on the ground afterwards that 
only a simple loop was on offer was no easy task. John Free who was the Army 
Club's resident Instructor in the early days of Lasham had a more torrid time. 
When flying over Lasham village, he admonished his pupil rather too forcibly 
ending the tirade with "You are a bloody fool, that's what you are". Later that 
day the Vicar of the charming Lasham church which was built on the site of a 
Saxon church, came to the club complaining that as he was trying to compose 
his sermon for the following day he did rather object to the heavenly castigation 
booming out from above.

--- PAGE 33 ---
Chapter Four - Dunstablc and Redhill___________________________37
Dunstable is Dunstable
The Glider Pilot's Psalter, produced on Ascension Day 1939 by 
the Lay Brethren of St.Hucklow Priory, Higher Winchum
Won't you come into our clubhouse 
So modem and so spry? 
Where many famous pilots eat 
And tell us how they fly
Oh, please don't talk so loudly 
Your tone must humble be 
Did I understand you rightly 
Sir You've only got a 'C'?
Yes quite! Of course! We must take care 
So pleased you understand 
For Dunstable is Dunstable 
No! We haven't got a band
I beg your pardon? Yes, you're right! 
That sure is Ashwell Cooke 
You know him then? How very odd 
Of course, you've read his book?
You know, of course, we've a Golden 'C' 
It's in that glass case there 
By all the hills here's Philip Wills! 
Just bask, it's rude to stare
What's that, you ask, upon the wall 
Revolving Chart and Box? 
Oh, that's a Cloud Base Instrument 
Designed by Mr. Fox
This picture here "The Times" called weird 
It caused no end of fuss 
Tis "Minimoa" thousands up 
Yes, that is the Octopus
Yes, it's quite the Temple of the Great 
Your description's very neat 
Good Heavens above! You'll pardon me 
But you haven't wiped your feet!
Under Lome Welch's dynamic tutelage the Surrey club was the most successful 
soaring club in the country with a strong emphasis on cross-country flying. After 
one glorious flight over south London, then over Westminster Bridge the 
thermals gave out and a landing was made at Brentford in Essex. On the way 
home with retrieve car and trailer we stopped at a lorry driver's cafe, then the

--- PAGE 34 ---
38 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
ideal pull up for glider drivers. "What have you got in that trailer" asked the cafe 
owner. On being told he said "Ah! you are the brassiere boys, you harness the 
uplift". His next merry quip I have used often since then when trying to raise 
funds for our sport "Gliding! It's the sport without visible means of support."
Expeditions to other sites were encouraged and in August 1948 four of us 
drove to a French gliding centre at Challes les Eaux near Chambery in Southern 
France. The flying was spectacular but we made the mistake of teaching the 
French pillow fighting and a drinking game called 'Cardinal Puff. Some years 
later when visiting another centre at Pont St Vincent near Nancy in North 
Eastern France, we discovered that French glider pilots had taken both to their 
hearts but demanded that we perform 'Cardinal Puff in French and Green 
Chartreuse! With typical Gallic panache they altered the art of pillow fighting, the 
end came not when the contestants were tired or bored but only when all the 
pillows had been demolished and all concerned were covered in feathers.
The social life at Redhill left nothing to be desired. As well as a popular 
squash court nearby, we had built a cosy snug bar in the corner of the 
clubhouse. The Surrey Flying Club had a well appointed bar for their wealthier 
members a hundred yards from ours and the RAF Volunteer Reserve unit had 
their mess some twenty yards further on. It was a case of 'throttle to bottle' in 
a very meaningful way.
Our parties enlivened the long winter evenings and were always well 
attended with visitors coming from near and far. One evening a fancy dress 
party was arranged with all participants having to wear something with an 
aeronautical theme. Tony Goodhart came as a CuNb (a cumulo-nimbus or 
thunderstorm cloud for the uninitiated) wearing a strange structure made of 
cotton wool on his head. In the centre a lighted candle served as a lightning 
strike but inevitably his magnificent creation was soon fully alight! Tony Oram 
pinned a blanket to his shoulders with a note on his navel announcing that he 
was a warm front. There were many more ingenious costumes. John Sowrey, 
later an Air Commodore in the RAF and the son of one of the famous Sowrey 
Brothers cheated a bit by arriving in his Father's First World War Royal Flying 
Corp