s uniform albeit with the right trouser leg cut vertically to provide room for 
the plaster cast from toe to knee acquired on a recent Surrey Club Skiing 
expedition to Switzerland. As a member of the RAFVR unit, I suggested that a 
visit to their dining-in shindig being held that night might liven things up so off we 
went. The Commanding Officer and his guests cheered or booed depending on 
our costumes but John held back as he wanted to make the grand entrance. 
Flinging open the door with such gusto that it nearly came off its hinges, he 
shouted "I say you chaps, can some of you help, I have just pranged my Camel". 
Unfortunately the very old Air Commodore who was an honorary member of the 
Mess, on seeing this apparition and hearing the shout, fainted clean away.
Our parties were, to say the least, always full of surprises. As the weather 
before one Christmas party promised extreme cold, no hell but plenty of 
damnation. The punch provided was of the 'get that down you, it'll warm you

--- PAGE 35 ---
Chapter Four - Dunstable and Redhill 
39
up in a trice' variety, The ingredients consisted of twelve bottles of brandy, thirty 
six bottles of red wine, a large tin of treacle, brown sugar, a few herbs and 
spices and lastly about ten pints of strong cider to 'water it down a bit!' 
Members contributed whatever they felt would add to the festivities and that 
year a frightfully clever imperial College member called Dr Maggie Thornley 
donated a vast quantity of Mars bars which some bright spark cut into thin 
slices. When asked why he did it he said that as it would be the only time in his 
life when he could be beastly to two hundred Mars all at once, he could not 
resist! Weird members!! Maggie explained that having once conducted some 
piece of scientific research on a chocolate related problem, she had been 
asked to be a Mars Bar Tester and every week a large parcel arrived, the 
contents of which she was supposed to eat and return her tasting findings to 
the manufacturer. Another member brought a sack full of peanuts. He had 
come home on leave from Africa where he was running the 'Groundnut 
scheme'. This was an attempt by the post-war Labour Government to combine 
overseas aid with an increase in food production, employment and increased 
stability in an African country. By the time the project was cancelled, the cost 
was more than even our Masters were willing to fund. We reckoned that the 
large sack in our possession had cost the British tax payers its weight in gold. 
The night of the party, only 45 hardy souls appeared and were give some 
punch on arrival. When after a splendid thrash we woke up the next morning 
feeling a little older, we discovered that some kind soul had thrown the uneaten 
Mars bar slices and the peanuts into the punch bowl which still contained a fair 
amount of the precious liquid. As breakfast the mixture was delicious!
Expeditions to other clubs around the country were looked forward to with 
eager anticipation as they provided varied and interesting flying and of course 
the opportunity to cause mayhem at which we were very adept. At the 
Southdown site at Friston near the coast in Sussex we gave our hosts our 
Austin Seven Spectacular where the five examples of this wonderful motor car 
owned by various members would be driven round in a tight circle, hand 
throttles set and the owners would then jump out and leave the cars to it until 
inevitably disaster loomed and the owners had to mount their chariots in the 
best way they could. Hugo Trotter always maintained a large supply of tinned 
food in his Austin for these expeditions but in time all the labels came off the 
tins. Heating or not heating was therefore a lottery although after a hard day's 
flying, hot peaches in syrup or cold vegetable soup tasted equally delicious.

--- PAGE 36 ---
40
A Glider Pilot Bold...
34*1 SlWf 5
••- '
ROYAL AIR FOHl L LiLiDi ?<G & 
SOARING ASSOCIATION
20 , "I 9 » A
"-"-'4 X
40th anniversary RAFGSA envelope. John Delafield, eight times UK National Champion

--- PAGE 37 ---
Chapter 5
The Mynd and the Cambridge Club
I
n 1949, we were exposed to the Cambridge University Gliding Club annual 
expedition to the Midland Club site perched on the top of the Long Mynd south 
of Shrewsbury in Shropshire. In general the Cantabrians were a splendid 
bunch, high IQs, great sense of adventure but some just downright foolhardy. 
Their annual visitations to this magnificent hill top location from which you get a 
wonderful view westwards towards Wales was always a marathon. They seemed 
to bring all their worldly gliding goods with them, towed by a collection of runcible 
vehicles which defied description. In keeping with their attitude to life and a total 
disregard of officialdom, it was quite normal for the least experienced 
undergraduate to be entrusted with the most arduous task. Alan Purnell well 
remembers towing two gliders on one trailer with the Cambridge tractor, a journey 
taking two days which was just as well as not only had he no driving licence, he 
had never driven anything before. The experience did him no harm though he 
much prefers cross-country gliding. By the end of 1997 he had flown for more 
than 8,500 hours in sailplanes, completed 572 flights of over 300km and 109 
flights of over 500km, virtually all of them in the United Kingdom.
Cambridge Club stories are numerous, very funny, but some like many 
good gliding tales, possibly a trifle apocryphal. The authenticity of the following 
ones have been checked with my contemporaries, but as with all old men, it is 
the memory that goes first and as Lee Trevino the golfer once said "the older I 
get, the better I used to be!" In those far off days, the Midlanders referred to 
their home as The Mecca of British Gliding'.
The Fumblies
with apologies to Edward Lear. 
History shows the author as 'Anon'!
They went to soar at the Mynd, they did 
At the Mynd they went to soar 
In spite of all that their friends could say 
On a winter's morn, on a stormy day 
At the Mynd they went to soar
The anemometer went slowly round
And keen types were anxious to get off the ground
"Though we go to the bottom and have to derig
We don't care a button, we don't care a fig
To the Mynd we've come to soar

--- PAGE 38 ---
42 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
Chorus
For far too few, far too few
Are the days with a Westerly wind
And they didn't go there to look at the view
They went to soar at the Mynd
He flew away in the Rons", he did 
In the Pons he flew so far 
"If I shut my eyes and pretend I'm brave 
I may catch up with a standing wave 
(They will fetch me back with a car)"
But his friends cried out as they saw him go 
"He's a clot to go up in the clouds, you know 
For the sky is dark and the wind is strong 
And happen what may, it's extremely wrong 
In the Pons to fly so far"
He tried to soar a Cadet, he did
To soar a Cadet he tried
But he started off at terrific pace
"Does he think he is going in for a race?
He will go to the bottom" they cried
When approaching to land over trees of great height 
There came an abrupt termination of flight 
For the downdraught had got him and pulled him below 
The other chaps murmured "It just goes to show!' 
As they shovelled the wreckage aside
He went to fly on a test, he did
On a test he decided to fly
To demonstrate to the pupils there
A Cadet couldn't possibly stay in the air
(So he didn't get very high)
This demonstration of carelessness
Was watched by the others with some distress
He scraped the hills as he flew along
Yet he never thought he was rash or wrong
Till he fell out of the sky!
Far too few, far too few 
Are the days with a westerly wind 
And although they really haven't a clue 
They've been to soar at the Mynd
*The much loved 'Rons' was the Dart Aircraft Ltd Cambridge 1, built at Dunstable 
and first flown in 1935.

--- PAGE 39 ---
Chapter Five - The Mynd and the Cambridge Club______ 
_________43
The Midland Club hangar is a splendid steel structure which looks for all the 
world like a miniature rainbow stuck on the top of the hill. Taking the gliders out 
in the morning and putting them back at the end of flying was a great 'tour de 
force' presided over by Teddy Proll their resident engineer. Shouts of " 
everybody lift" and "everybody push" could be heard by half the county as 
Teddy made us thread yet another wing over one and under another. Hangar 
packing was an art form which only he ever fully understood.
One evening a number of the Cambridge members decided to sleep on top 
of the curved hangar roof and needless to say discovered that man tosses and 
turns when asleep. It is said that drunks seldom hurt themselves when falling 
down which is certainly not the case when you roll off from the top of the 
Mynd's pride and joy.
The Chairman of the Midland Club then was Charles Wingfield, a quite 
splendid one off character of the old school. He had just taken delivery of his 
shiny new Olympia and very generously allowed a number of us to fly his 
previous glider, a Slingsby Kirby Kite I called' Gracias' known affectionately as 
'Grassy Arse'. In 1947 Charles had been a member of the British team flying in 
the American National Soaring Contest held at Wichita Falls in Texas. This 
event attracted seventy sailplanes and lasted for fifteen days. Apart from 
setting new British Distance and Out and return records flying an Olympia, he 
also gained the second Gold 'C' on the British register.
However he will be remembered by the Americans for something quite 
different. Charles was a tall distinguished looking man, sporting a full 
moustache and during the Contest habitually wore his wartime Army khaki 
desert gear, during the war he saw much service in North Africa including a 
spell as ADC to General Sir Alan Cunningham, the General Officer 
Commanding East Africa Force. To the Americans he was the model English 
Gentleman and it is possible that the late very funny actor Terry Thomas 
modelled himself on Charles. For the last two days of the meet the hosts were 
rushing about like demented flies and there was great hustle and bustle. The 
activity was meant to be a great secret but you cannot keep anything quiet on 
a gliding site. Came the last evening and Captain Ralph Barnaby, US Navy 
(Rtd), the President of the Soaring Society of America, took Charles by the arm 
and led him to a site where ox and pig roasting as well as a mountain of T-bone 
steaks were being prepared in great profusion. "This Sir" said the gallant 
Captain, with a theatrical sweep of his arm "is in your honour". Charles 
surveyed the scene, waited until he had everyone's rapt attention and then said 
"Oh I say, what is it?" "A genuine Texas barbecue" was the answer. "Oh I say" 
said Charles "how jolly primitive".
He lived a full and interesting life, always active in outdoor pursuits as well 
as distinguished service to the community, serving not only as the High Sheriff 
of Shropshire but also a Justice of the Peace and Chairman of the Mid- 
Shropshire Bench. He lived near the Long Mynd in the family house which was 
a sort of mini-Buckingham Palace. It was very much the stately home built on 
the estate owned by the family since 1753. Even earlier, several Wingfields held

--- PAGE 40 ---
44 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
offices of State during the reign of King Henry VIII and were named in the King's 
Suite at the Field of the Cloth of Gold. An illustrious family - one ancestor helped 
to teach the Swiss to ski and a great uncle of Charles, Walter Clopton-Wingfield, 
was the 'father' of lawn tennis. Charles was an enthralling colourful human being 
who kept us amused by his many true life stories. In one he recalled that the 
only serious injury he sustained in the fighting in the Low Countries in 1940 was 
during his evacuation from Dunkirk aboard a fishing boat where he suffered 
sunburn to the soles of his feet after snoozing barefoot during the arduous 
journey back to England. The address of his family home said it all. Even the 
Post Office delivered letters addressed simply to Onslow, Shropshire. While we 
were at the Mynd we were invited to visit him there and when his man servant 
general factotum called Anson opened the door to us he asked us who we were. 
On being told that we were his Master's gliding friends, he led us directly to the 
downstairs toilet pointing out the soap and towels in a very obvious fashion. 
Charles had a great sense of humour and enjoyed doing the unexpected. On 
one occasion he appeared at Redhill in full morning dress complete with a grey 
top hat and insisted on flying our Slingsby Tutor open cockpit as he wanted to 
see whether he could complete the flight without losing his hat!
Another Wingfield story regretfully David Ince omitted from his 
autobiography (he claims there just was not space!) concerns the Leaders and 
Elders of the Derby & Lanes Gliding Club who took themselves rather seriously. 
The younger pilots attending an early post-war National Championship being 
held at Camphill made every effort to liven up the proceedings. Charles, then 
Chairman of the Midland Club, challenged David Ince, his Chief Flying 
Instructor, to a duel. Both attired in their pyjamas, Charles's being made of pure 
silk, were required to expel their natural gases from a certain part of their 
anatomy while holding on to a tree near the clubhouse. The gas was lit and the 
one producing the longest flame was adjudged to be the victor. The young 
thought it a great joke though it took some time before the Elders stopped 
muttering about smutty schoolboy pranks and the state of the modern world!
On our first morning at the Mynd, Doctor Cotton arrived in his Bradford 
Jowett van and persuaded Charles to give him a check flight in their Slingsby 
T.21. Charles had just rigged his Olympia and was eager to fly as the local hunt 
was active at one end of the hill and he wanted to 'put on a bit of a show' for 
them. The story goes that his beat up was not really appreciated by the hunt 
although when in 1952 he was forced to stop gliding due to the debilitating 
recurrence of severe sinusitis from which he had suffered for some time, he 
was forgiven his transgression and almost immediately became the Joint 
Master of the South Shropshire Hunt. He did come back to gliding some years 
later and in 1986 completed his Diamond 'C'. As he said "I think that was my 
last record - Gold 'C' in 1947, my Diamond in 1986. Will anyone take longer?"
It was agreed that Charles would fly first while we prepared the T.21 and 
took it to the launch point. He said that as soon as he saw the glider in position 
he would land and then fly with Doc. We did not see or hear from Charles again

--- PAGE 41 ---
Chapter Five - The Mynd and the Cambridge Club 
45
until noon when he telephoned from a farm at the bottom of the hill asking for 
a retrieve. The Cambridge boys immediately agreed to bring him back and, 
hooking a trailer on to their Beaverette retrieve vehicle being driven by David 
Martlew, set off down the very steep Asterton Road on the west side of the hill. 
Half way down he jack knifed with the Beaverette fortuitously burying its nose 
in the hill. Unperturbed by this set back, one of their number ran back up the 
hill and proceeded to back their other retrieve vehicle, a modified Ambulance, 
down the hill. Then in true Cambridge style they decided to modify the trailer 
so that they could tow it backwards up the hill.
In the meantime we had rushed down in the Jowett van and soon realised 
that a classic major Cambridge rebuild was about to start and there was nothing 
we could do to speed things up. As Doc Cotton wanted Charles back on top in 
order to fly, Ron Macfie and I jumped into Charles Wingfield's very grand limo 
and went in search of his trailer. As soon as we had found it and hooked up we 
set off going the long way down the hill taking the Ratlinghope (pronounced 
'ratchup' by the locals) Road. When we arrived at the farm Charles told us sadly 
that we had not brought his trailer but being ever resourceful Redhillites we 
suggested that one Olympia trailer was just as good as another until we looked 
inside and saw that there was already a glider in there.
"No problem" we said and pressed on back to the Mynd to get the correct 
empty trailer. Half way up Ratchup we ran out of petrol. The Cambridge Club 
had blocked Asterton, we now blocked the other road so all the routes up to the 
top from the west were now impassable. I quite enjoyed the nice long walk 
back to the site to find a can of petrol and eventually we returned triumphantly 
to Charles who by this time was being entertained to dinner by two charming 
ladies in the farmhouse. On hearing what had happened he casually 
mentioned that we should have looked in the boot as he always carried a gallon 
of petrol just in case! It was on the stroke of midnight when we arrived back at 
the club complete with Charles, his car, glider and trailer. The Cambridge Club 
entourage beat us back by thirty minutes.
That week we doubled the cross country miles ever flown from the site and 
were highly amused when at the weekend some staid Midlanders said how 
sorry they were that the west wind had not blown for us. On hearing about the 
wonderful thermals one replied "Damn nuisance aren't they!" Since it was a 
ridge site, the term 'hillbound' was certainly apposite and had a negative effect 
on some of their pilots.
After the Mynd we visited a small club operating at Staverton Airfield between 
Cheltenham and Gloucester. When we found that no launches were possible 
because their cable retrieve vehicle had broken down we offered to pull the cable 
out by hand and five of us started on the task. Half way back to the launch point, 
the cable broke. The visit was not a total failure as each of us had an aerotow in 
Thoby Fisher's Olympia, a charming man who was Kitty Wills's brother.
On one non flying day we decided that we ought to visit Tewkesbury Abbey 
for a bit of culture to be followed by a trip on the river. John Edwards, now an

--- PAGE 42 ---
46 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
eminent doctor and a Fellow of the Royal Society, then a veritable pillar of the 
Cambridge Club came with us. A great character, but what we did not know was 
that apart from rolling off the hangar roof he was allegedly very accident prone. 
As we drank in the atmosphere and history of the Abbey someone pointed up at 
the battle honour flags hanging from the wall dating back to Waterloo and 
earlier. Just as John pointed out a really old relic which was little more than a 
few tatters of material attached to a pole, the whole thing fell off the wall. Later 
that day with Ann Douglas (Welch) driving the boat we had hired, and just as we 
had persuaded her to ignore the instructions and see how fast we could go, 
John sitting at the back spotted an interesting cable. Being a small boy at heart 
he pulled it for all he was worth, the rudder turned through ninety degrees and 
we promptly rammed the bank. At a pub we made him drink two pints of strong 
Gloucestershire Scrumpy for every one of ours and thus ensured that he was in 
no state to cause any more mayhem on the return journey.
At their Bourn Airfield site near Cambridge they used their Kranich two 
sealer to show pupils the joys of gliding but solo training was carried out flying 
the Slingsby Cadet. One day a pupil wanted to practise a stall on his own 
having been shown what it was like in the Kranich. On that occasion his 
Instructor Gordon Bell had prevented excessive stick movements as his pupil 
was a highly trained athlete capable of great strength and endurance. "Pull the 
stick back until the glider stalls and then push it forward until you pick up speed. 
When you feel back pressure on the stick, level off' was the instruction given 
before take-off. Up went the Cadet, then came the stall but when the 
unsuspecting pupil pushed the stick forward he found that it went down almost 
to the cockpit floor as the wooden stop was missing. By then he was flying 
upside down but with great presence of mind, he managed to grab the stick 
again and proceeded to pull it back for all he was worth followed by a normal 
landing. Ted Warner, the resident Cambridge Ground Engineer, watching this 
extraordinary manoeuvre fell over backwards in his excitement.
Gilroy 'Gil' Phillips, a mighty man, still 'Mine Host' at the Clarence House 
Hotel in Tenby, West Wales and even more grandly erstwhile Mayor of that 
sleepy seaside resort sent me his account of a typical Club happening. He 
writes: "To try something different a few of us agreed that we would do a 180 
degree turn immediately on release at a launch height of about 800/900 feet, fly 
fast down the runway and pull up over the launch point while someone timed us 
with a stop watch. My own flight in the Slingsby Tutor went according to plan 
until I did a sharp pull-up over the launch point at something under three 
hundred feet. It was said to be nearly vertical and the 'deadly hush' came far 
quicker than my reactions. I instinctively gripped the controls firmly to stop the 
clutching hand from winning and my dinghy sailing experience said 'sternway in 
irons' so I 'up helmed' and pulled the stick hard back. The tail immediately flicked 
up over my head and the horizon appeared in its normal position, just above the 
nose, but with the ground uppermost. As dried mud and one small spanner flew 
into my face, I looked up to see a clutch of pale pink round faces looking down

--- PAGE 43 ---
Chapter Five - The Mynd and the Cambridge Club__________________47
at me hanging hard in my straps. There was nothing else to do except sit there 
with the stick hard back in my stomach and wait. The Tutor dived and levelled 
off at high speed crossing the boundary hedge downwind at under fifty feet.
Because of the difficulty of de-rigging a Tutor with all those struts, 
turnbuckles and flying wires, it was not done to land outside the airfield. In any 
case I did not think that I could stop in the field as my speed was too high. I then 
did what turned out to be my first chandelle and found myself approaching the 
main road at hedge top height. I had a blurred impression of a line of cars 
running on to the grass verge and stopping, after which I floated gently up the 
runway, losing speed until after a normal main wheel and tailskid touchdown, the 
front main skid grounded at the feet of our Chief Flying Instructor Paul 
Blanchard. I sat quite still watching him, complete with his green Tyrolean hat on 
his head, walk slowly round the Tutor eventually arriving at the cockpit. Solemnly 
he presented me with a small part of a bush which he had removed from the 
tailskid and said "You are a very lucky fellow, please do not do that again"."
Gil's spirited rendition of the famous Victorian dirge was de rigeur at every 
Cambridge Club gathering:
Oh, the wheel came off the hearse
The coffin fell out on the road
The driver got out and said with a shout
Well, I'm blowed!
The widow got down to the driver
In a mournful voice she said
Oh what has my husband down to you
That you muck him about when he's dead
The Cambridge Club members were very proud of their light blue coloured 
Olympia. Had it been a wartime Lancaster bomber they might have painted 
bombs on the side of the fuselage to show how many missions it had flown. 
This Glider should have had 'A', 'B', 'C', Silver 'C', 'North Sea' and 'Irish Sea' 
painted on the fuselage.
First Jimmy Grantham on a cross-country found himself out over the North 
Sea. No one would ever believe my account of this fabulous story so the gallant 
pilot offered to write it himself:
"The date was 25 April 1950. The original rather ambitious plan was to try 
and reach Dover and see if conditions were right for a Channel crossing. This 
intention was frustrated in the end by a radical shift in wind direction from the 
forecast North Westerly to a little south of west together with a big increase in 
wind strength. After an auto tow at Bourn I went straight to cloud base and 
subsequent climbs took me up to 8,500 feet in cloud. I started the final climb 
over West Mersea in very strong lift, went into cloud at 6,000 feet and then 
climbed steadily to nearly 14,000 feet flying blind the whole way. Fumbling with 
the oxygen which I had never used before did not help my concentration much 
and wearing the mask caused my glasses to mist up! When it was obvious I

--- PAGE 44 ---
48 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
had reached the top, I first set a South Westerly course still in cloud hoping to 
compensate for the crosswind drift but when a brief emergence from cloud at 
9,000 feet showed nothing but sea below I changed course to due West. All this 
time the Air Speed Indicator was inoperative and the wings and canopy were 
heavily iced up so the rate of sink was horrendous. Emerging below cloud at 
5,000 feet the coast was only dimly discernible a long way ahead, there was 
still ice on the wings and it soon became obvious we would not make it. I looked 
around for ships to land near and be rescued but saw none and went ahead to 
touch down as near to the shore as possible.
The actual ditching went very well. I kept the tail well down to avoid nose- 
diving underwater and we settled onto the sea in a cloud of spray over a mile 
offshore three miles north of Walton on the Naze. The sea being relatively 
calm, the Olympia floated well but the cockpit soon began to fill up from below. 
Having quickly removed the canopy, I hung onto it using it to help me balance 
after I had climbed onto and then stood up on the centre section which was 
awash after the Olympia had fully settled down in the water. This position had 
two advantages, only my lower legs got wet and I was much better able to see 
and be seen. I signalled frantically at people I could see on the distant beach.
Later I learnt that someone saw this but thought I was waving a friendly 
greeting from a boat! After half an hour I was getting really apprehensive and 
thinking of trying to swim ashore. Wisely I resisted this impulse, the sea was 
very cold and I had no idea of the tidal currents. No one had observed the 
'landing'. I was told later that luckily the Coast Guard at Walton were keeping 
a good lookout and eventually spotted the floating wreckage. The first I knew 
of this was when the maroon went up exploding with a loud bang to call out the 
lifeboat. Then came the message flashed in Morse code by Aldis lamp "Help is 
coming". You can imagine my feeling of relief, all I had to do now was to hang 
on until the lifeboat arrived which it did some thirty minutes later. To my 
annoyance however the coxswain stood off about thirty feet, threw me a lifebelt 
on the end of a rope and told me to jump in and grab hold of it. I protested that 
I had stayed dry so far and if he came alongside I could climb on board without 
getting wet-but he refused. I later discovered that he thought the Olympia was 
a powered aircraft and he was afraid that he would damage the lifeboat's hull 
on a submerged propeller or engine.
No sooner was I on board the lifeboat, terribly relieved and grateful but 
soaked to the skin and colder and more uncomfortable than I had been for the 
previous hour on the Olympia wing, than a Royal Air Force rescue launch from 
Felixstowe arrived having heard the news on the radio. They were most peeved 
at being beaten by the Walton men. Their doctor insisted on coming on board to 
examine me before they left. We then set about trying to tow the Olympia back 
to Walton. For the first two attempts we used a grappling iron which soon came 
off and incidentally was not doing the glider much good. The only satisfactory 
method in my opinion was to pass a rope around the main spar. As none of the 
crew really knew what was required I did the job myself getting wet again up to

--- PAGE 45 ---
Chapter Five - The Mynd and the Cambridge Club__________________49
the waist in the process. Also the nose of the glider got bashed to pieces by the 
lifeboat's hull when we went alongside. The tow was a slow business since at 
any speed of more than two knots the Olympia disappeared under water with 
only the tip of the fin showing and the strain must have been tremendous.
In the meantime the crew radioed ashore so that my people could be told 
what had happened. They also gave me dry clothes many sizes too big but 
better still, the biggest mug of rum I have ever seen. By the time we reached 
Walton pier I was in a very happy state and assisted in hauling the Olympia up 
on to the beach through the surf. This was the third time I got wet that 
afternoon. Then the local policeman turned up and wanted to take a statement 
from me so having rescued the barograph we went to the police station where 
I proceeded to dry the chart and myself in front of a roaring fire while telling my 
story. In return he gave me a certificate that said the barograph had been 
opened in his presence so that I could claim Gold 'C' height! I was then handed 
over to the local Shipwrecked Seamen's Aid Society who kindly supplied a 
complete change of clothing, a room in a hotel and a hot bath. To cap it all just 
before getting into the bath the Press arrived and I had to give an interview in 
my underpants. I remember one of the headlines to the story was "Glider pilot 
plunges 13,000 feet into North Sea"."
When the sky blue Olympia had been thoroughly dried out and repaired the 
Club decided to visit Bill Crease's mountain site at Clwyd Gate in North Wales. 
Near his restaurant Bill had carved out a launch run for the bungey team with 
the ropes running through the chicken run. Being an adventurous lot they 
explored various other possible launching sites in the area and one day went 
to the Great Orme's Head near Llandudno where they found a good bungey 
site and an adequate field for landing back on top of the cliff. Several pilots had 
very good flights including Mike Gee who described his as "one of my star 
flights ever, particularly as half way up the cliff face was a road and each time 
a bus passed along it I would dive down and fly alongside the bus and then 
climb up again above the cliff'. The next time they visited that site the wind was 
from a different direction and they drew lots to see who would fly first. Mike was 
the lucky one or so they said at the time! His story too has to be told in the first 
person and this is what he wrote:
"Shortly after the launch I turned left, away from our landing field but this 
proved to be a mistake as there was not any lift. So I turned the other way and 
there was none there either. By now I was losing height and realised that not 
only would I not reach the field but I might not even reach the shore. The 
promenade was fairly empty and I thought of landing there but even that 
proved too far. Then I saw the lifeboat launching slipway, it was a bit short and 
with my luck I would probably meet the lifeboat coming down as I went up, but 
even that proved to be unreachable. The sea it was and just as I expected to 
hear the skid rustling through the top of the water there was a dirty great bang 
and suddenly I was completely submerged. In about two seconds flat I was out 
of my parachute harness and sitting on top of the centre section waiting

--- PAGE 46 ---
50 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
anxiously until a little man in a rowing boat came and rescued me. That was 
not one of my star flights, it only lasted four minutes!"
On another flight some years later he was struck by lightning but did not 
jump out. He is very proud of his 'Goldfish' badge. If you jump in earnest using 
an Irvin parachute, you are made a member of the Caterpillar Club, if you land 
in the sea you become a member of the Goldfish Club, a rare honour for glider 
pilots, though trust the Cambridge University Gliding Club to have two!
One other story among many concerning the Cantab Mob was the occasion 
when they were retrieving a glider with their Beaverette. This type of 
comparatively cheap mode of transport, fitted with a Standard 40 engine was 
much favoured by gliding clubs. Jack Rice of 'Rice Trailers' fame realised that 
this light armoured car could easily be adapted for civilian gliding use, was 
cheap and easy to buy in war surplus equipment sales. Jack had come across 
these strange fighting vehicles during the last year of the war when the Air 
Training Corps used them extensively for their gliding schools. Denis Dawson 
now takes up the story of how they bought the first batch:
"We chose the Tipsy aircraft to fly from our base at Rearsby Airfield to the 
place near Uffingham where the auction was going to take place. Jack did two 
or three passes at a hundred feet while I looked at the Beaverettes lined up 
below. He then ordered me to fly at no more than fifty feet so that he could have 
a really close view and select the ones he considered the cleanest! We arrived 
at the auction and managed to buy six or eight of the ones we wanted for an 
average price of £35.00. These were driven, sometimes on Jack Rice's trade 
plates, to his Trailer factory at Crosby near Leicester where the gun turret and 
most of the thick armoured plating were removed".
The other clubs soon latched on to them and used them mainly for cable 
towing. Visualise the scene. The Cambridge crew towing a trailer on the King's 
highway when a cyclist got tangled up between the Beaverette and trailer. They 
stopped, picked her up, found she was unhurt, dusted her down and sent her on 
her way. Fearing the strength and displeasure of the Law' and, in truth, in case 
someone had witnessed the mishap, they decided to report the incident at the 
nearest police station. "I wish to inspect your vehicle and with this here 
accelerometer which I will clamp to said vehicle I will test your brakes" said the 
Inspector. Good as his word, the device was attached, the policeman perched on 
the Beaverette and off they drove. "Stop" shouted our man and the accelerometer 
promptly flew off and smashed on the road in front. Back to the cop shop they 
went to get a new one. While the Inspector and Ken Machin were inside searching 
for a spare, Laurie Vandome with great foresight decided to tighten the brake 
cables just to make certain that they passed the test. Back came Ken, the Law 
and a replacement instrument. Again off they went except this time there were 
three new factors in play. First the policeman told Ken to drive faster, second he 
had decided to stand up holding on to the steel plate in front of him with one hand 
while clutching his precious piece of high tech in the other and last, but by no 
means least, Ken did not know what Laurie had done to the brakes. When the

--- PAGE 47 ---
Chapter Five - The Mynd and the Cambridge Club_____ 
51
order "Stop" was given, the new accelerometer and the policeman flew through 
the air with the greatest of ease and damaged His Majesty's property, i.e. the 
tarmac road surface. When they got back to the Station, the Sergeant on duty said 
"You haven't broken another one, have you?" to which the classic reply was "Yes, 
and can we have another policeman as well?"
The Surrey members liked visiting Cambridge especially for the annual 
dinner at which the Inter University Brunt Trophy was awarded. The Dinner 
held at the Dorothy Cafe in the centre of town was, by our standards, a very 
staid and proper affair and so we decided to liven things up.
John Pringle, the President of the Cambridge University Gliding Club 
presided in grand style. During the war he had made a major contribution to the 
development of radar before returning to his academic life at Cambridge after 
the war, finally ending up at Oxford University as Professor of Zoology. On this 
occasion Professor Sir David Brunt, who was not only an eminent 
meteorologist but also a Vice President of the British Gliding Association, was 
to award the prize himself.
First we tied our linen napkins together and passed them up the table with 
instructions for each person to attach his own. When the sausage reached John 
Pringle just as he was introducing the great man, he calmly added his own napkin 
and moved it on past the guest of honour without a murmur. We felt quite cheated, 
but after all John had been a very active glider pilot himself for years and knew 
how to deflate people like us. At our end of the table there was a stupendous bowl 
of flowers and we wondered whether that would be more appropriate.
Up ft went and reached Sir David just as he got up to make his speech. Quite 
unconcerned he looked at it for a while, said "Nice, isn't it" and passed it on. After 
that we behaved immaculately and realised that at last we had met our match.

--- PAGE 48 ---
52
A Glider Pilot Bold...
I lauling the OLympia up onto the beach

--- PAGE 49 ---
Chapter 6
Comps and all
Bloody Competitions
Words by Pat Wood
These comps are just a bloody cuss 
They go from bad to bloody wuss 
And no-one cares for bloody us 
Bloody Competitions
The bloody weather's bloody bad 
The bloody met man's bloody mad 
No wonder we look bloody sad 
Bloody Competitions
No bloody luck, no bloody skill 
We're hardly on the bloody hill 
Before we're feeling bloody ill 
Bloody Competitions
The bloody flights are bloody fraught 
Fraughter than they bloody ought 
And when they're not they're bloody short 
Bloody Competitions
Retrieves are awful bloody trials 
We drive the trailers bloody miles 
And all we get is bloody piles 
Bloody Competitions
Best bloody place is bloody bed 
With bloody ice on bloody head 
Before we all drop bloody dead 
Bloody Competitions
I
n August 1949 we entered the Surrey Weihe in the National Championships to 
be held at Camphill, the home of the Derby & Lanes Gliding Club. As we came 
from a beautifully maintained flat grass airfield, Camphill presented quite a 
challenge. Then an uneven, small boulder-strewn fairly narrow hilltop site, it was 
not the relatively smooth field we see today. It even had dry stream beds, when 
the rains came they caught out unsuspecting glider pilots as Tony Deane- 
Drummond discovered before the war when the tent which he had erected late 
one evening was washed away during the night. The site had a typical Derbyshire 
dry stone wall running along the edge of the field behind which, if the wind was 
blowing from the west on to the hill, there lurked a fearsome clutching hand.
As we approached Camphill by road we noticed with some alarm the small size 
of the surrounding fields which were inevitably enclosed by yet more dry stone 
walls. In Surrey Club parlance these were classic claptraps. Walter Morison is 
credited with this descriptive expression for a field surrounded by obstructions

--- PAGE 50 ---
54 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
which is too small to land in-but you just have! His other invention was The Fumble 
Factor' defined as the number of loose bits of the glider and trailer which can be 
forgotten and left behind in the field by the pilot and crew after an out-landing.
We soon discovered, when anyone was unlucky enough to damage one of 
these structures (not a recommended practice with a wooden glider which 
invariably came off worse in the encounter) rebuilding them was an art form 
which is handed down from father to son going back to Roman times. The 
uninitiated soon found that even very careful stone selection and placing was 
no guarantee of success and, just when you thought you had finished, the 
whole lot fell down and you had to start all over again.
The Camphill Crawl 
Tune: 'Lambeth Walk'
Any time you're Camphill Way
Any evening, any day
You'll find us all, doing the Camphill Crawl
Every little road and drain
Helps to clear the snow and rain
And you'll find 'em all built from an old stone wall
Everyone's good and matey
Cause boulders with muck are weighty
Why don't you clear the mud there?
Hi, there!
Dig there!
Once you get in Basil's squad
Through the stones and mud you plod
You'll find us all doing the Camphill Crawl
Hey!
John Neilan, a British European Airways Captain; Derek Reid, the highly 
competent meteorologist who later emigrated to Australia and was a very 
active member of the Australian gliding scene and I were sharing the flying. We 
were up against stiff competition as not only were Philip Wills and Prince 
Birabongse of Siam also flying Weihes but also my old friends from RAF 
Germany were bringing three with them. In the event we came second and 
brought home the Du Garde Peach Trophy awarded to the best club team and 
£10 as well as the second prize of £20. Unheard of wealth for the Surrey Club. 
The sweetheart of the Champs was a very fetching blonde called Margaret 
Swale who was flying her father's Olympia. Every day she wore a different trouser 
suit which looked for all the world like pyjamas and certainly helped to lift morale 
more than somewhat. It is said that King George V only ever gave his son Edward 
one tip on kingship: "Empty your bladder whenever you can". The last thing a 
competition pilot had to do prior to launching was to expel all surplus body fluid as 
built in pee tubes were not yet fashionable in glider design. With the ever present 
Margaret this was difficult but Jerry Smith the local Chief Instructor came to our 
rescue. "What you do is sit on the ground, spread your legs, cover yourself with 
an air map and Hey Presto!" He then proceeded to demonstrate just as La Swale

--- PAGE 51 ---
Chapter Six - Comps and all________________________________55
rushed up shouting "You have pinched my map" and pulled it away. Entertainment 
factor high, success rate low so it was a case of back to the drawing board.
What is interesting about the 1949 Comps is that out of the thirty gliders, only 
five were not team entries. It was not the rich man's sport as are present day 
competitions. The programme reads like a race meeting at Goodwood or Ascot 
today. We had a Clerk of the Course, an Assistant Clerk, three Judges, three 
Chief Marshals, Starters and three Royal Aero Club Stewards, all frightfully 
socially OK pillars of the aviation community. But never the less it was fun.
Because of the adjacent small fields and the prevailing westerly winds, tasks in 
subsequent comps held at the site were set of the 'down wind dash' variety which 
always came to an abrupt end when the east coast of England was reached. When 
the 1954 World Championships were held there, the site acquired a new name, 
'Damphill' since that is what the foreigners called it because it rained so much.
For me one flight came to an extremely abrupt end when, due to sheer 
carelessness, I had to land downwind into a cornfield on the very edge of a steep 
cliff right on the coast. The tailplane and the corn had a bit of a fight, the com won 
and I was out for the rest of the Comps. Out of dark clouds, however, sometimes 
emerge silver linings! I had persuaded a cigarette manufacturer by coincidence the 
producer of the 'Nasties' we were given free at the end of the war to pay me £50 
to put advertising posters on either side of the Weihe trailer. When the Comps 
Officials asked to borrow my trailer as a crowd barrier, I readily agreed. The 
Tobacco Company's biggest customer was driving through the Peak District when 
to his astonishment he saw a Cigarette Poster. Knowing that it was strictly against 
the law to put up any advertising hoardings of any sort in this National Park, he was 
somewhat puzzled. On his return to his office, he telephoned the Sales Director and 
congratulated him on their remarkable feat. When Rothmans checked they were 
so pleased that they doubled their payment to me which paid for the repair.
For the rest of those Comps, whenever I appeared at briefing, my'friends' 
sang "How much is that Weihe in the window, the one with the waggly tail?" After 
the Comps, Peggy Mieville 'sold' the sides of all the Dunstable trailers to Ovaltine 
for £20 each per year which in my view was far too little. After some cars were 
'carved up' by swinging glider trailers advertising the chocolate drink, the 
advertising value was deemed to be negative and the scheme was scrubbed. 
Pity really, it might have been developed into quite a little gold mine for gliding.
Pilots soon realised that rather than land at the goal airfield on the coast such 
as North Denes or Ingoldmell whenever the latter was set, there was always a 
cry at the morning briefing of "Not Jingle Bells again!" they could squeeze a few 
more distance points by landing on the beach just beyond the airfield boundary. 
This ploy gave rise to a famous story which has survived for the past thirty plus 
years though somewhat modified. It was alleged that John Williamson was the 
first to arrive to be confronted by a large irate policeman, possibly even the 
original Police Constable Plod, who accused John of endangering the Great 
British Public who were paddling about in the surf with their trouser legs rolled up. 
No amount of hand wringing apologies on John's part satisfied the man in blue 
and so he resorted to some gentle name dropping. "You can't arrest me, my 
father comes from these parts, he is Henry Williamson, the author of Tarka the

--- PAGE 52 ---
56 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
Otter"'. Just then Alf Warminger landed and when the policeman had a go at him, 
Alf said "You can't arrest me, I am the Sheriff of Norwich". Finally Peter Scott 
landed and when the law recognised him he asked him for an autograph and 
gave up the unequal struggle. It made a good story but it is time to relate what 
really occurred. It happened during a Dunstable Nationals. George Burton was 
the first to land and PC Plod had no trouble nailing him. When Chuck Bentson, 
Dan Smith and Geoffery Stephenson landed in quick succession he called for 
help and a very officious Police Inspector joined the fray. It was only when the 
Sheriff of Norwich and Peter Scott had joined the party and the Inspector had 
secured the letter's autograph were the pilots allowed to enlist the help of 
interested bystanders to pull the gliders up the beach before the tide came in.
The Bristol Song
Most likely written by Bill Gotch and Bill Wills 
Tune as Rule Britannia
Now once there was a fellow who had an ambition to fly
So he did decide
He'd learn to glide
And get into the sky
But when he made enquiries where gliders could be
found
They said they've got 'em
At Lulsgate Bottom
But mostly on the ground
Chorus:
Singing Rule Britannia, Britannia rules the sky
And Britons never never never shall be
Married to the angels if they never never learn to fly
So off he went to Lulsgate to see what he could do
And there he met
The gliding set
A very motley crew
He asked them could they help him to get into the sky
And they all replied, if you want to glide
You must see the C.F.I.
Chorus yet again
Then from a nearby hangar they dragged a curious thing
On a wheel it stood
Some bits of wood
Surmounted by a wing
On a perilous perch they placed him and said "Now do or
die"
And with a shout
They cried "All out!"
And hurled him in the sky

--- PAGE 53 ---
Chapter Six — Comps and all 
57
Chorus again and again
He very soon discovered and quickly got the knack
It's all a trick
What you do with a stick
And how you pull it back
But if you push it forward, then down you go like a diver
With a sickening sound
You hit the ground
And it only costs you a fiver
More Chorus
So off he went to Roundway for soaring on the slope
With visions he
Of a Silver'C'
His heart was full of hope
But all he found at Roundway was tears and sweat and
blood
With piles of muck
And the vehicles stuck
In an endless sea of mud
Chorus for the last time
And now he is proficient a sailplane pilot wise
The soaring kind
With a sore behind
He sails the summer skies
And if you want a 'line-shoot' why he can tell the tale
Of the big Cu-nim
That swallowed him
Like Jonah and the Whale
In May the following year I visited the Bristol Gliding Club and flew some of their 
gliders at Lulsgate Bottom, now the Bristol International Airport. Some days 
before, their T.21 had landed in the middle of the airfield and the only other 
glider out that day was a Tutor being flown by an early solo pilot. It is hard to 
believe, but on landing, he managed to ram the two-seater from behind. It is 
quite extraordinary how often this seems to happen as some early solos do 
seem strangely attracted to other gliders when coming in to land.
Lome Welch used to preach safe flying by explaining that the time taken to 
repair a small patch in the fabric takes the same time as the pilot retrieving his 
glider on his own without any mechanical aid from one end of the airfield, and a 
near write-off prang repair takes about as long as your man pulling a glider back 
on his own from Warsaw! It was a valuable lesson which we all took on board.

--- PAGE 54 ---
58
A Glider Pilot Bold...
Many hands make light work at 'Jingle Bells'
Stamps from 17 countries 
- the UK is not one of 
them

--- PAGE 55 ---
Chapter 7
Denmark
T
he Danish Air Force had ordered three new Olympias from the 
manufacturer, Elliotts of Newbury. Horace Buckingham, the owner, decided 
that his test pilot would deliver them, being towed to Denmark behind the 
Elliott towing and touring aeroplane they had just completed. The tug pilot was to 
be a gentleman called appropriately Mr Twogood. The test pilot should, for the 
record, remain nameless. He did, however, have a forceful personality and 
decided that he would have a telephone link from the glider to the tug so that he 
could give instructions to the pilot though not vice versa. Having cleared Customs 
at Lympne in Kent, they hooked up, both pilots climbed into their respective 
steeds and the tug pilot tried to start his engine. It would not start so he set the 
throttle, got out and swung the propeller by hand. The next bit is rather like the 
famous Hoffnung story about the Irish Bricklayer, the Bricks and the Bucket. The 
throttle was set open too much, the engine fired and the tug and glider 
combination started rolling. At this juncture the glider pilot with great presence of 
mind jumped out and ran towards the tug, presumably intending to climb in and 
cut the power. Unfortunately not only did he get tangled up in the tow rope but he 
had also forgotten to pull the cable release in the glider. He did manage to get 
clear of the rope and watched the tug and glider proceed across the airfield until 
both were wrecked when they hit first the far hedge and then rolled into a ditch. 
The Cavalry in the shape of the Surrey Club came to the rescue and we 
were awarded the contract to deliver the other two Olympias. David Ince was 
towed by Lome Welch in the first one which had been left on an airfield in 
Belgium and on his return I was the pilot for the second glider. On 5 June 1950, 
before leaving Redhill, Lome warned me that he might fall asleep in the Auster 
tug and if I saw his head in an unusual position I was to pull his tail to wake him 
up! The first leg from Redhill to Lympne took fifty minutes. From there straight 
out to sea climbing to three thousand in the middle of the Channel where upon 
Lome started descending so that we crossed the French coast very low. All I 
remember about the sea crossing is that I spent my time looking for ships just 
in case the rope decided to part or the ring pull out of the nose Ottfur hook. I 
was not really a very happy bunny, water is all right in small quantities in whisky 
but not when it is below you in large dollops. We reached Eelde in Holland after 
three hours and fiftyfive minutes flying and I was so pleased at the thought of 
landing that I aerobated all the way down only to find that the barograph locker 
door had opened and inside we had stored all our papers, money and 
passports. Luckily nothing had fallen out so that my hastily carefully prepared 
speech to Lome proved unnecessary.
"I might fall asleep over the Zuider Zee" said Lome. And he did! Gently 
swaying from side to side woke him up much to my relief. The leg to Belringe on 
the west coast of Denmark took just two hours and fifty minutes. The last leg

--- PAGE 56 ---
60 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
from there to Varlose, the military airfield at Copenhagen, which lasted seventy 
minutes was pure magic. We flew no higher than five hundred feet and every 
time Lome saw a fairyland castle he would circle round it and then move on.
A Danish Air Force colonel welcomed us on arrival and detailed a Major to 
show us to our quarters. After eight and three quarters hours on tow my priority 
was a large drink and a bath. Imagine our surprise when we were taken to the 
station hospital and two dishy nurses showed us to our rooms. They are no 
fools these Danes. They knew! That night after a splendid dinner and ample 
liquid refreshment in the mess the Colonel decided to take us out to Tivoli 
Gardens, the Copenhagen pleasure park which caters for all needs. I do not 
remember too much about that night other than the two Spanish potato 
salesmen who joined the party quite early on. Why they adopted us or indeed 
who they were I never discovered. But boy, was I grateful the next morning 
when I woke up in my hospital bed; the services of the doctors and nurses were 
most welcome and very necessary. The next day the Danes invited us to fly up 
to Karup, an airfield in the north of the country and a day later we flew back to 
Redhill. Trips like that only come once in a lifetime and if ever you get the 
chance do not hesitate to take it.
The following month Jack Karran and I, both flying Olympias, managed to 
break the United Kingdom Out and Return record flying from Redhill to 
Netheravon and back. Jack was something terribly grand in the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and one of his stories is worth repeating over and over again. Every 
gliding club occasionally has an outbreak of low unauthorised aerobatics 
performed by pilots showing off near the ground. When this happened at 
Redhill, in his quiet way of speaking Jack said "During the war I was instructing 
at a RAF Flying Training School in Rhodesia and we suffered from this 
problem. I asked the Air Ministry to send out two psychiatrists to investigate this 
phenomenon. When they had completed their task we asked them to 
announce the result of their findings in front of all the pilots. They announced 
that their research showed without doubt that anyone who carried out 
unauthorised low aerobatics invariably suffered from an unsatisfactory sex life. 
"Do you know," said Jack, "that stopped it overnight"
At a seminar of British Sporting World Champions we found that the 
common thread which they all shared was an almost ruthless determination to 
win, to fully understand the rules and know how to bend them without falling 
foul of the officials. Philip Wills was no exception and during the 
Championships at Camphill he perfected his art of supreme 'one up manship'. 
Very much in keeping with the image of the Great Man, he always wore spats 
when he flew and just as modern professional footballers seem to feign injury 
during a match for tactical reasons, Philip used his spats in much the same 
way. Launching was on to the hill by means of a short winch run and when your 
turn came off you went. Not Philip when his turn came to be launched he would 
suddenly find that his spats needed adjusting which would miraculously be 
completed just as a good looking cumulus cloud drifted towards the hill face.

--- PAGE 57 ---
Chapter Seven - Denmark__________________________________61
Dear Philip, he had a similar trick which he practised at BGA Council meetings. 
When things were not going his way, he developed a ploy which transfixed new 
members but which the more experienced of us knew meant that he was about 
to hoist the red flag similar to those flown at ranges when firing is in progress. 
He would start a sentence, stop, produce a large sheet of special paper, tear 
off a small square, pack some tobacco into it, push it into his pipe, light it and 
then produce a vast cloud of smoke. By now the poor unfortunates would have 
lost all concentration and Philip, ever the picador, was ready for the kill.
We also learnt something new. Quite a lot of us were milling around in the 
duty thermal over the site when suddenly we were surrounded by streams of 
lavatory paper. Now we are all used to meeting birds, straw, aeroplanes and 
other gliders in the air but never loo paper. The answer it transpired was that dear 
Wing Commander Sandy Sanders, a RAF pilot, had invented his own thermal 
indicator. By throwing out streams of paper he reckoned he would see where the 
core of the thermal was and follow this paper chain upwards. As we all know, the 
Air Navigation Order states that only water or finely divided sand may be thrown 
out of flying machines without the prior permission of the Minister! Sandy's ploy 
did not work but merely goes to prove that glider pilots must be a tiny bit mad.
The only magazine devoted to gliding at that time was Sailplane and Glider. 
The first issue was on 6th September 1930 and the cover price for the then 
weekly was just three pennies in old money. It is interesting to note that this 
was the period of intense interest in our sport with very many clubs being 
formed all over the country though the depression year of 1931 sadly finished 
most of them off. By 1948 with a cover price six times higher and now only 
appearing as a monthly, the Editor was a very strange human being indeed. He 
invented and nurtured a vendetta against Philip Wills, the British Gliding 
Association and the Surrey Club which we regarded as a total joke although it 
meant that he never mentioned any of them in his self styled The first Journal 
devoted to Soaring and Gliding'. The man was really a Mark I buffoon and we 
all tried to think of ways to cut him down to size but it was Lawrence Weight of 
the London Club who dreamt up the best joke to play on him.
A letter from someone called R K Hafid posted in Cairo, Egypt, was sent to 
the Editor giving a full report of a lecture given by Professor Aziz to the 'Societe 
des Planeurs de I'Universite et du Cite du Caire' describing his pioneering 
research into the Pyramid cloud, the Arabic name was translated as The 
Umbrella of Khufu', a phenomenon which had been seen by travellers ever 
since the Pyramids were built. He described how the students at the University 
had adapted a war surplus Waco fifteen place military glider and as a result had 
achieved startling performance figures of best L/D at the speed of 64.5kph, a 
stalling speed of 55kph and a minimum sink rate of 1.2 metres per second. 
With this fine machine, the Professor was able to prove that the cloud was in 
reality a Pyramid induced standing wave in which Aziz and the Chief Instructor 
were able to climb to the base of the cloud at 2265 metres. At this point Aziz 
'became ill' and had to abandon the flight. In the course of landing the glider

--- PAGE 58 ---
62 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
was damaged and so no further research was possible. However, the 
Professor cordially invited glider pilots from England and other countries to 
bring their sailplanes to Egypt and sample his wave in order to gain their Gold 
'C' height. This splendid spoof complete with some remarkable photographs, 
one of which had pride of place on the cover, duly appeared in the May 1948 
issue of'S & G' and the only person who believed every word was the Editor.
By the beginning of 1950 it was decided that the British Gliding Association 
should publish its own magazine and so Gliding was born. Under the editorship 
of Jacques Cocheme and later the great Doctor (Doc) A E Slater of penny 
whistle fame it very quickly gained a large readership. Just at the time when the 
Editor of Sailplane and Glider incurred the wrath of the Inland Revenue and 
Her Majesty's Commissioners of Customs and Excise and was sentenced to 
serve a term as a 'guest' of Her Majesty.
I was able to persuade the owner of the magazine to give it to the EGA and 
thus in that year we combined the two under the title of Sailplane and Gliding. 
You can well imagine that the Council spent many happy hours arguing long and 
hard over the title as the word 'Sailplane' was not in common usage in Britain 
though our American cousins had adopted it some years before. In the February 
1958 issue of'S & G' our Editor wrote that the word had been invented by Sir 
George Cayley to describe his first model glider in 1804. Now, nearly two 
hundred years later, we tend to describe training machines as 'gliders' and the 
sleek high performance soaring beauties as 'sailplanes', so honour is satisfied.

--- PAGE 59 ---
Chapter 8
The EGA Ball
I
n December 1950, the British Gliding Association celebrated its twenty first 
birthday and we resolved to mark it in style. At that time the noble Lord 
Londonderry had allowed us and the other sporting aviation organisations to 
use his fabulous mansion in London's Park Lane as our headquarters. It was a 
most impressive building, full of Roman and Grecian statues, beautiful paintings 
and the most imposing staircase which led to our offices off the central ballroom. 
It was exactly the right setting for a 'Gliding Ball'. The assembled company was 
knee-deep in celebrities and much to 'the Gaffer's' surprise, everyone behaved 
beautifully and he announced that other Balls would be held in the future. In 
1953 to celebrate Philip Wills winning the World Championships in Spain the 
previous year, we organised another grand affair. The terribly socially OK 
magazine, The Tatler, much read by the Upper Crust and members of the Cafe 
Society, sent their Social Editor complete with a photographer to record the 
proceedings. One of the photographs which appeared the following week was a 
picture of 'Mr Ray Brigden deep in conversation with Miss Brenda Horsfield 
enjoying an aperitif before dancing'. It was almost certainly the first time that The 
Tatler had printed a photograph of someone holding a pint of beer! My 
Committee members had decorated the venue with great style but Philip Wills' 
wife Kitty decided that the large naked marble statues of males might offend the 
sensibilities of the young and so rushed round sticking paper bunches of grapes 
over certain parts of the male statues.
It was a great success and we decided to hold a ball the following year. On 
that occasion John Profumo, certainly the best and most effective 
Parliamentary Under Secretary at the Ministry of Civil Aviation to look after our 
interests, the junior Minister in the Department which controlled our destiny, 
came as our Guest of Honour with his lovely actress wife Valerie Hobson. The 
Cambridge Club fielded Lionel Alexander as part of the entertainment. Old men 
do forget and when checking the facts with him in 1982 Lionel wrote 
"unfortunately the script is not in my scrap book. I call to mind that the original 
was delivered on bits of paper and in pencil. It was typed as well, but I am fairly 
sure that P... W... impounded the only copy.
We shall never know. However, this is a textually corrupt transcript of a 
longhand note of the speech delivered by 'Mister John Profundis MP, the 
Parliamentary Under-Secretary of the Ministry of Fag and Disheries at the 
British Gliding Association annual reception held at Londonderry House.
"My friends, for you are my friends, all of you even though I have never met 
most of you before and, with any luck, will never see you again, my Minister the 
Secretary of State has asked me to make profuse apologies on his behalf 
because, greatly to his regret and in all sincerity, he has been unavoidably 
detained by a subsequent engagement. My friends, I bring you good news. For

--- PAGE 60 ---
64 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
many years, your tireless representatives have bent the Ministerial ears of my 
predecessors, in the hope, not of any financial handout (which, given the 
potential expenditure of billions and the certainty of ultimate bankruptcy which 
would undoubtedly have been forthcoming) but of intangible assistance with 
regard to access to disused airfields. I do not doubt that, in aiming at this mark, 
they failed to appreciate the enormity of what they proposed. To accede to them, 
I must tell you, would be to shake the Constitution to its foundation garments, by 
breaching the 30 year rule. You have not heard of this rule? Let me then explain 
that it is enshrined in the mists of constitutional convention so that, unlike statute 
law, it means what I say it means. It establishes the principle that, once the RAF 
have abandoned an airfield, which moment is defined as 21 years after the death 
of the last resident night-watchman, then 30 years must elapse before the airfield 
may be used by or sold to anyone other than an influential property developer.
My friends, this pillar of the Constitution notwithstanding, the 
representations to which I have referred have not fallen on deaf ears, however 
bent. On the contrary, my Secretary of State has authorised me to say, and I 
add my personal and independent confirmation that the policy of Her Majesty's 
government is henceforth and until the times do alter to undertake to provide 
to the British gliding movement every assistance in its power short of action.
My friends, it is the view of all of us in government that you have richly 
deserved this new policy. Among the Goliaths of the great aviation vested 
interests, the gliding David, independent, determined, self regulating, stands 
with its finger in the dyke holding back the tide of legislation that threatens to 
engulf it in the burning deck of the statute book. That is why we have set up an 
independent body (soon to be announced) with power to make regulations 
designed to redress the balance between David and Goliath, by outlawing the 
use of David's sling. In this way (so the members, designate of this new body 
assure me) will the rule of law in the air, with justice for all, be established.
My friends, happy is the man (and, of course, the statutory woman) who 
partakes of ambrosia, the food of the Gods, in the shape of this, the purest form 
of flight, the inheritance of Icarus. I see around me healthy, smiling faces. I 
sense by your loud laughter during my little speech your high spirits and well- 
being. It is accordingly clear to me that mastery of your strange machines holds 
no terror for you. As the man who, for the political moment, controls your 
destinies, this gives me confidence in your practical abilities. As for theory, I 
have gained, by talking to your Chairman, a new insight into the principles of 
soaring flight which will enable me better to discharge my duties on your behalf. 
It will of course be the Chairman's turn to speak next. When he does, perhaps 
he could find a moment to answer one question that still perplexes me-what do 
you do when the wind drops?
The time, my friends, has come to thank you, on my own behalf and that of 
my absent Secretary of State, for entertaining me. As I have already hinted, we 
in the Ministry have great plans for you. In the future, when plans have come 
to fruition, look back I beg you to this occasion and remember that it was I who

--- PAGE 61 ---
Chapter Eight - The EGA Ball
65
suggested to you your slogan for to-day, which is "You never had it so good"".
All of us, especially John Profumo enjoyed this tremendously except The 
Gaffer', Philip Wills, who did not look at all certain whether a Ministerial leg-pull 
was wise. Knowing that he of all people was adept at fighting officialdom and 
was doing so to great effect on our behalf we decided that perhaps he was 
showing solidarity with his fellow Old Harrovian and just hereditary good 
manners which dictates that you must never insult a guest even if the satirist 
was also an O.H. as indeed Lionel Alexander is. Nevertheless, it was a brilliant 
satire and I am only sorry that the full text does not exist to-day though maybe 
one day one of his sons might find it among P ...W...'s papers.
Some years later when we were head to head over the protracted battle for 
Lasham with countless Ministers, Under-Secretaries and so called Civil 
Servants who invariably finished off their letters with 'I have the honour to be 
Sir, Your obedient Servant' we were subjected to this form of official 
'gobbledegook' for real and they could not understand why we had wry smiles 
when they started on their diatribes.
\fr. and Afrs. John Profumo with Mr. W. A. H. Kfthn, 
ball organizer, and ,\frs. Kahn

--- PAGE 62 ---
66 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
In fact Lionel Alexander need not have composed his splendid spoof had 
he known of the letter sent by Lord Nathan, the Minister of Civil Aviation in 
November 1947 which was published in the Surrey and Imperial Club Year 
Book 1947/48. Three paragraphs are pure 'Profundis':
"The gliding clubs are at this time labouring under many difficulties, and the 
fact that they have achieved so much in this year is a great tribute to the energy, 
enthusiasm and public spirit of everyone concerned. I look forward to more 
plentiful times when this fine spirit will reap a greater reward.
I take a great interest in the gliding movement. However I cannot promise, 
in the present difficult condition of the country, that subsidies or supplies of 
material can be provided. So far as it is possible for us to do so, I and my 
Ministry will give all the assistance we can. Since I paid a visit to the National 
Competitions last June, and was able to make two brief flights as a passenger, 
I have been anxious to see more of the gliding clubs. I have been closely tied 
to my desk, but nevertheless have several times been ready to make such 
visits. But the weather is no kinder to Ministers than to club members and each 
time it has let me down. I hope for better in the future".
It really is an absolute classic which makes one wonder if there a school 
somewhere to which budding politicians are sent to learn 'double speak'.

--- PAGE 63 ---
Chapter 9
More of them and us
T
he London Gliding Club at Dunstable and us Surrey Redhillites kept up 
a splendid rivalry. We regarded them as a hill bound crowd who with a 
few exceptions did not seem to relish or copy our cross-country activities. 
In truth they rather regarded us as a lot of noisy, big headed yahoos which was 
probably fully justified but we felt it was time to teach them a few lessons. When 
the west wind blew directly on to their hill which allowed them to stooge up and 
down to their hearts content, they were not the earliest risers in the world. 
Knowing that hill soaring was possible all day, warm beds held a great 
attraction for them on cold winter's mornings. For safety reasons they restricted 
the number of gliders on their hill at any one time so we resolved to tow all our 
gliders over to their hill at first light and watch their reaction when they saw 
what we had done. After due consideration, in other words when Lome Welch 
stopped us in our tracks, we had to dream up another scheme.
Word reached us that they had organised a fancy dress party so over we 
went all wearing Dinner Jackets. On our arrival we found the locals in a terrible 
state as they had invited a gang of nurses from the local hospital but had failed 
to lay on any transport. We immediately set off for them in the Surrey Club 
retrieve vehicle, an ex-Army lorry which we called 'Mephisto' and was painted 
pillar box red with an imposing devil painted on both doors. In Dunstable town 
we saw a forlorn group of girls standing by a bus stop, asked them whether they 
were nurses waiting to go to a dance and without further ado poured them into 
the back before returning triumphant to the site. An hour later an irate Matron 
from a hospital in Luton telephoned to ask when her nurses would be collected.
We had picked up the wrong ones, but after picking up the right ones we 
were very happy as it tipped the odds heavily in our favour.
The following Dunstable party firmly stated 'Evening Dress will be worn' so 
we went over dressed as Ancient Britons in hessian dyed in woad and wore 
straw hats. It was all very childish but good clean fun. Esprit de corps was a 
Surrey trait of which we were very proud. Flying up and down the Dunstable 
Downs was great, with the Whipsnade Zoo at its southern end where it was 
strongly inadvisable to land as the big cats roamed their large open air pens 
looking upwards expectantly as you flew overhead. At the northern end is the 
bowl where, if you were below hill height, you had to execute a smart 180 
degree turn. In front of the launch site the hill was sparsely covered by clumps 
of bushes which afforded discreet shelter for loving couples engaged 'in other 
forms of sport'. Indeed two very eminent glider pilots still claim to have warm 
recollections of the 'tunnels of love'. On one of our visits, a Surrey member 
attempted to hill soar when there was a distinct lack of wind blowing at the ridge. 
As he sank lower and lower and realised that he and the Tutor he was flying 
would soon be landing, he managed to shout a warning before flying into one of

--- PAGE 64 ---
68 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
the bushes. The effect was electric, very similar to beaters putting up pheasants 
during a shoot except on this occasion he raised four birds of a different kind 
who with their partners were flushed out and ran off with their plumage in some 
disarray. Some time later something, possibly hungry rabbits, killed off the 
bushes and it was only years later before the love nests grew again.
When the London Club hosted the National Aerobatic Championship, one of 
our members gave a demonstration in his Slingsby Motor Tutor. This motorised 
version of the beloved Tutor could be fitted with either a 25 or 49 horsepower 
engine and to quote Fred Slingsby's words (see British Gliders and Sailplanes by 
Norman Ellison) "it was altogether a foolish and wasteful venture". As the pilot was 
flying up and down the hill, Cedric Vemon, then Chairman of the EGA Technical 
Committee, who was watching and realised that an accident was about to happen, 
told his two small children to look at something away from the hill just before the 
pilot and his aircraft met the hill in a most undignified manner. On being asked how 
he knew, Cedric replied "Well I could see that the pilot was running out of height, 
speed and ideas all at the same time". The sequel to the prang is worth recording. 
Led by Rika, the pilot's wife, we ran up the hill fully expecting to find a mangled 
corpse. Rummaging through the wreckage we found the pilot happily hale and 
hearty seemingly only suffering from a severely dented ego. For good order and 
discipline however he was carted off to hospital for a check-up and when Rika was 
offered a seat in the car, she said that she would come on as soon as she had 
found her husband's teeth. A little later someone shouted "I've found them, here 
they are". Rika sped off to the hospital where himself was enjoying the attention 
of pretty nurses and when she said "Darling look, I got your teeth" he looked very 
surprised and answered "I don't know what you are talking about, I've got mine in 
my mouth". Whose teeth the other ones were we never did discover.
Back at home our Christmas parties gained a cultural dimension when the 
'SODS'-the Surrey Operatic and Dramatic Society was formed with two 
presiding men of genius and education, namely Messrs. Hugo Trotter and Pat 
Wood writing plays and songs. 'Wings for Prudence', a Victorian melodrama 
complete with a villain who was booed and the hero who was cheered by the 
audience, is a work worthy of the great Bard of Stratford himself and I 
recommend all gliding clubs to stage it. To that end and with scant regard to the 
authors copyright, the complete script will be found at the end of this book. 
Similarly the Surrey song sheet is a mine of hysterical and historical interest 
and some other choice songs are also added at the end of this narrative. Pat 
Wood, the quite brilliant lyricist, wrote many of the Surrey Club songs but his 
best without doubt is the lament 'A Glider Pilot bold was he... Singing the songs 
on long winter evenings brought us members closer together and certainly 
helped to forge us into a strong and virile club.

--- PAGE 65 ---
Chapter Nine - More of them and us___________________________69
We are the Surrey Gliders
Tune as The Church's one foundation
We are the Surrey Gliders 
What flaming good are we 
We are no good at winching 
We fumble with M. T 
And when it comes to soaring 
We shout until we're pink 
Where are the flaming thermals 
There's only flaming sink
The gliding club's foundations 
Are Lome and Mrs D 
They are the one salvation 
Of clueless types like me 
They put me in my glider 
They tow me on to track 
And when I'm in a claptrap 
They come and fetch me back
The gliding club's foundations 
Are Mrs D and Lome 
They save us from frustration 
When we can't get airborne 
They take us to the clubhouse 
Whene'er the weather's fraught 
They buy us pints of cider 
And so they flaming ought
We are the London gliders 
We are the hillbound boys 
We are content to revel 
In orographic joys. 
And if you should deride us 
We'll shout until we're blue 
That we've got dear Charles Ellis 
And Joan and Dudley too
We are the trailer drivers 
We are 'Mephisto's Own" 
We are on hand to answer 
If you should telephone 
But if it's after nightfall 
Or if the outlook's bleak 
We'll only blow you raspberries 
And leave you 'up the creek'

--- PAGE 66 ---
70 
A Glider Pilot Bold...
We are the Bar Committee, 
We toil both night and day 
And everyone admits that 
We're socially OK 
But should you break an ashtray 
Or should you drop your drink 
We'll take the little pieces 
And stuff them in the sink
Redhill attracted diverse gliding types like bees round a honey pot. One day a 
very proper gentleman arrived in his Rolls Royce, introduced himself-we called 
him Baron Divorce as his name sounded very much like that and insisted that we 
teach his seventeen year old daughter to glide. From the back of the Roller 
stepped an apparition who looked for all the world like Walt Disney's Sleeping 
Beauty with a delicate China Doll face, long flowing hair down to the tiny waist 
and dressed in the most immaculate white flying suit. The Baron insisted that only 
the Chief Flying Instructor could fly his darling daughter and invariably followed 
the launch in his Rolls Royce until they were safely off the ground. When she 
landed, he would speed over to the glider, order the child back into the car and 
stay there until it was her turn to have another launch. Lome found the whole 
experience very unsatisfying as he was not able to brief and debrief her but we 
were pretty sure that the baron did not really trust us. Sad to relate that after the 
girl had been airborne about twenty times, we never saw them again.
Another fascinating visitor was Group Captain Edward Mole who seemed to 
have an endless supply of the most beautiful young female companions. One 
cannot do justice to the man but to implore you to read his autobiography called 
Happy Landings with a subtitle; The recollections of a light hearted airman. A 
founder member of the London Gliding Club, whose 'A' certificate, which he 
gained in 1930, is number No.6 on the British register, he had been sponsored by 
Barbara Cartland, then a young and beautiful woman on the threshold of her 
literary career. Surprisingly she claimed to have been the first person to suggest 
aero towing as a way of launching gliders. Her aim was to win the 1931 Daily Mail 
prize for the first glider crossing of