# 1.	 USER MANUAL INTRODUCTION

WEST SYSTEM epoxy is a versatile, high-quality, two-part epoxy that is easily 
modified for a wide range of coating and adhesive applications.  It is used for 
construction and repairs requiring superior moisture resistance and high strength. 
Originally developed by Gougeon Brothers Inc. over 50 years ago for the production 
of wooden boats, WEST SYSTEM epoxy products are now recognised throughout 
the marine industry and are in everyday use for the repair and construction of 
fibreglass, wood, aluminium, steel, composite and ferrocement vessels.  The 
knowledge that the WEST SYSTEM epoxy is designed for the marine environment 
- a particularly harsh and demanding requirement - promotes enormous confidence 
in the product range and, in more recent years, WEST SYSTEM epoxy has been 
used extensively in the construction industry, model making and the DIY market 
for many applications.  
(See Our Booklet – “Other Uses-Suggestions for Household Repair”).
This Manual is designed to help you become familiar with WEST SYSTEM 
products and to use them effectively.  It also provides information about safety, 
handling and the basic techniques of epoxy use which will allow the WEST 
SYSTEM products to be tailored to your exact repair and construction needs. 
These techniques are used in a wide range of repair and building procedures such 
as those described in detail in WEST SYSTEM instructional publications and DVD.
The Problem Solver will help you identify and prevent potential problems 
associated with using epoxy.
The Product Guide gives a complete description of the WEST SYSTEM 
products, including selection and coverage guides, to assist in choosing the most 
appropriate products and package sizes for the job in hand.
WEST SYSTEM products are available from quality marine chandleries 
throughout the world.  For the name of your nearest chandlery or for additional 
technical, product, or safety information, contact Wessex Resins & Adhesives 
Limited or your local distributor.
Why WEST SYSTEM epoxy?
All epoxies are different.  Epoxy brands 
vary considerably in their formulations, 
quality of raw materials and their 
suitability for marine and other 
extreme environments.  It is not 
difficult  to market a general 
purpose epoxy for the marine 
industry 
or 
to 
formulate 
a 
product 
having 
some 
favourable 
characteristics 
whilst 
sacrificing 
other 
important physical properties. 
However, 
it 
is 
much 
more 
difficult balancing all the physical 

--- PAGE 4 ---
User Manual 2
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
and mechanical properties necessary for a versatile, high quality marine epoxy.  
Defining the required performance criteria and designing a formula to meet those 
criteria requires good chemistry, rigorous test programmes, extensive field trials, 
continuing contact with the industry and direct experience with today’s high-
performance boat builders and other composite users.
Balanced epoxy performance
WEST SYSTEM epoxy is designed for boatbuilding and repair by experienced 
epoxy formulators who know the engineering and the chemistry required for today’s 
high-performance composite structures.  With more than forty years of developing 
marine epoxies, Gougeon Brothers Inc. and Wessex Resins & Adhesives Limited. 
have continued to formulate, test and improve WEST SYSTEM resin and hardeners 
to create the most reliable and well balanced epoxy system available today. 
Potential resin and hardener formulae, ingredients and combinations are tested to 
compare fatigue strength, compression strength, glass transition temperature and 
peak exotherm.  Additionally, samples are tested for hardness, tensile strength, 
tensile elongation, tensile modulus, flexural strength, flexural modulus, heat 
deflection temperature, impact resistance and moisture exclusion effectiveness. 
Such thorough testing ensures that any change in a formulation will improve at 
least one characteristic of the product without diminishing the other properties.
Comprehensive testing
Continuing research and comprehensive testing are essential for the development 
of both improved epoxy formulations and better construction and repair methods.  
In addition, the material test laboratory also conducts extensive test programmes 
to support builders, designers and industry on specific projects.
Standard BS EN ISO Test Procedures are normally used to evaluate the physical 
properties of adhesives and composite laminates but, occasionally, the laboratory 
is called upon to evaluate to a particular DIN or ASTM Standard.
The information provided by a comprehensive test programme and feedback 
from customers contributes to a data base on epoxies and epoxy composites that 
is continuously growing.  This knowledge is invaluable for achieving the proper 
balance of properties required for a versatile, high-quality marine epoxy and 
ensures the information is up-to-date and reliable.
Technical support
To ensure that the ultimate characteristics and versatility of the WEST SYSTEM 
epoxy are achieved, Wessex Resins provides one other important ingredient – 
technical service.  Whether the project in hand is large or small, WEST SYSTEM 
technical publications and videos offered in this guide provide detailed procedures 
and instructions for specific repair and construction applications.  Further assistance 
can be obtained by writing or contacting our technical staff either via Telephone: 
+44 (0) 1794 521111 or by email: techinfo@wessex-resins.com – we are always 
interested in your projects whether it is a major repair on a boat, replacing a rotting 
window sill at home or a simple DIY job in the garage.

--- PAGE 5 ---
User Manual 3
WEST SYSTEM User Manual