# 2.	 HANDLING EPOXY

This section explains the fundamentals of epoxy safety, curing and the steps for 
proper dispensing, mixing and adding fillers to ensure that every batch cures to a 
high strength solid.
2.1 Epoxy Safety
Epoxies are safe when handled properly but it is essential to understand the 
hazards and take precautions to avoid them. 
Hazards
The primary hazard associated with epoxy involves skin contact.  WEST SYSTEM 
Resin may cause moderate skin irritation;  WEST SYSTEM Hardeners may cause 
severe skin irritation.  Resins and hardeners are also sensitisers and may cause an 
allergic reaction but, from our experience, most people are not sensitive to WEST 
SYSTEM Resin and Hardeners.  These hazards decrease as resin/hardener mixes 
reach full cure but it is important to appreciate that the hazards also apply to the 
sanding dust from partially cured epoxy.  Please refer to the Material Safety Data 
Sheets (MSDS) for specific product warnings and safety information.
Precautions
1.	
Avoid contact with resin, hardeners, mixed epoxy and sanding dust.  Wear 
protective gloves and clothing when handling WEST SYSTEM materials.  WEST 
SYSTEM 831 Barrier Cream provides additional protection for sensitive skin and 
allergies.  DO NOT use solvents to remove epoxy from the skin.  Immediately after 
skin contact with resin, hardeners, sanding dust from epoxy and/or solvents, use 
WEST SYSTEM 820 Resin Removing Cream for the initial clean-up, followed by a 
wash with soap and warm water.
If a skin rash develops while working with epoxy, stop using the product until 
the rash completely disappears.  If problems persist when work is resumed, 
discontinue use and consult a doctor.
2.	
Protect your eyes from contact with resin, hardeners, mixed epoxy, and 
sanding dust by wearing appropriate eye protection.  If contact occurs, immediately 
flush the eyes with water for 15 minutes.  If discomfort persists, seek medical 
attention.
3.	
Avoid breathing concentrated vapours and sanding dust.  WEST SYSTEM 
epoxy vapours can build up in unvented spaces and ample ventilation must be 
provided when working with epoxy in confined areas such as boat interiors.  When 
adequate ventilation is not possible, wear an approved respirator.

--- PAGE 6 ---
User Manual 4
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
4.	
Avoid ingestion.  Wash thoroughly after handling epoxy, especially before 
eating.  If epoxy is swallowed, drink large quantities of water - DO NOT induce 
vomiting.  Call a doctor immediately.  Refer to First Aid procedures on the Material 
Safety Data Sheet.
5.	
KEEP RESINS, HARDENERS, FILLERS AND SOLVENTS OUT OF THE 
REACH OF CHILDREN.
For additional safety information or data, write to: EPOXY SAFETY, Wessex Resins 
& Adhesives Ltd., Cupernham House, Cupernham Lane, Romsey, Hampshire 
SO51 7LF
2.2 Clean Up
Contain spills with sand, clay or other inert absorbent materials and use a scraper 
to collect as much material as possible.  Follow up with absorbent towels.
DO NOT use either sawdust or other fine cellulose materials to absorb hardeners 
and/or dispose of hardener in waste containing sawdust or other fine cellulose 
materials—spontaneous combustion may occur.
Clean resin, or mixed epoxy residue or uncured epoxy with WEST SYSTEM 850 
Cleaning Solvent.  Clean hardener residue with warm soapy water. 
Dispose of resin, hardener and empty containers safely in accord with local 
disposal regulations.
DO NOT dispose of resin or hardener in a liquid state.  Waste resin and hardener 
should be mixed and cured (in small quantities) to a non-hazardous inert solid.
CAUTION!  Large volumes of curing epoxy can become hot enough to 
ignite surrounding combustible materials and produce hazardous fumes. 
Place containers of mixed epoxy in a safe and ventilated area away from 
workers and combustible materials.  Dispose of the solid mass when the cure is 
complete and the mass has cooled.  Comply with the local disposal regulations 
2.3 Epoxy Chemistry
Understanding cure time
• Cure time is shorter when the 	
	
epoxy is warmer.
• Cure time is longer when the 	
	
epoxy is cooler.
Figure 1  As it cures, 
mixed epoxy passes 
from a liquid state, 
through a gel state, to 
a solid state.

--- PAGE 7 ---
User Manual 5
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
Open time and cure time determine the build and repair operations.  Open time 
dictates the time available for mixing, application, smoothing, shaping, assembly 
and clamping.  Cure time dictates the time before removing clamps, abrading or 
proceeding to the next step in the project.  Three factors determine the open time 
and cure time of an epoxy mix – hardener cure speed, epoxy temperature and 
volume of mix.
a) Hardener speed
Each hardener has an ideal temperature cure range.  At any given temperature 
each resin/hardener combination will go through the same cure stages but at 
different rates.  Select the hardener that gives adequate working time for the job in 
hand at the temperature and conditions under which the work is to be completed.  
The Product Guide describes hardener pot lives and cure times.
Pot life is a term used to compare the cure speeds of different hardeners.  It is the 
period of time a specific mass of mixed resin and hardener remains a liquid at a 
particular temperature e.g. a 100g mass of an epoxy mix in a standard container at 
25°C is a routine quality control test procedure.
Because pot life is a measure of the speed of cure of a specific mass (volume) of 
epoxy rather than a thin film, the pot life of a resin/hardener mix is much shorter 
than its open time.
b) Epoxy temperature
The warmer the temperature the faster an epoxy mix will cure (Figure 1).  The 
temperature at which epoxy cures is determined by the ambient temperature plus 
the exothermic heat generated by the reaction.
Ambient temperature is the temperature of the air and/or the material in contact 
with the epoxy.  Epoxy cures faster when the ambient temperature is warmer.
c) The volume of mixed epoxy
Mixing resin and hardener together creates an exothermic (heat producing) 
reaction.  Always mix small batches of epoxy because the greater the quantity, the 
more heat generated, the shorter the pot life and cure time.  In a larger volume, 
more heat is retained, causing a faster reaction and yet more heat e.g. a plastic 
mixing cup containing, say, a 200g mix. can generate enough heat to melt the cup.  
However, if the same quantity is spread into a thin layer, the exothermic heat is not 
produced as quickly and the cure time of the epoxy is determined by the ambient 
temperature.
Controlling cure time
In warm conditions use a slower hardener to increase the open time.  Mix 
smaller batches that can be used quickly or pour the epoxy mix into a container 
with greater surface area e.g. a roller pan, thereby spreading out the epoxy into 
a thin film and extending the open time.  After thorough mixing, the sooner the 
epoxy is transferred or applied, the more open time is available for coating, lay-up 
or assembly.
In cool conditions use a faster hardener and employ a hot air gun, a heat lamp 

--- PAGE 8 ---
User Manual 6
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
or other dry heat source to warm the resin and hardener before mixing and/or after 
the epoxy is applied.  At room temperature, additional heat is useful when a quicker 
cure is desired.  NOTE!  Unvented kerosene or propane heaters can inhibit the 
cure of epoxy and contaminate epoxy surfaces with unburned hydrocarbons.
CAUTION!  Warming a resin/hardener mix will lower its viscosity, allowing 
the epoxy to run or sag more easily on vertical surfaces.  In addition, 
heating epoxy applied to a porous substrate (soft wood or low density 
core material) may cause the substrate to “out-gas” and form bubbles in the epoxy 
coating.  To avoid out-gassing, wait until the epoxy coating has gelled before 
warming it.  Never heat mixed epoxy in a liquid state over 50°C.
Regardless of the steps taken to control the cure time, thorough planning of the 
application and assembly will allow maximum use of the open time and cure time 
of the epoxy mix.
Cure stages of epoxy
Mixing epoxy resin and hardener begins a chemical reaction that transforms the 
combined liquid components into a solid.  As it cures, the epoxy passes from the 
liquid state , through a gel stage before it reaches a solid state. (Figure 1)
1.	
Liquid – Open time
Open time (also working time) is the period, after mixing, that the resin/hardener 
mix remains a liquid and is workable and suitable for application.  All assembly 
and clamping should take place during this period to ensure a dependable bond 
is achieved.
2.	
Gel – Initial cure phase
The mix passes into an initial cure phase (also known as the “Green Stage”) when 
it begins to gel.  The epoxy is no longer workable and will progress from a tacky gel 
consistency to the firmness of hard rubber.  An indent can be made with the  thumb 
nail and it is too soft to dry sand.
While the epoxy is tacky, a new application of epoxy will chemically link with it, so 
the surface may be bonded or recoated without sanding.  This ability diminishes 
as the mix approaches the final cure phase.
3.	
Solid – Final cure phase
The epoxy mix has cured to a solid state and can be dry sanded and shaped.  It 
is no longer possible to indent the surface with the thumb nail.  At this stage, the 
epoxy has reached 90% of its ultimate strength, so clamps can be removed.  The 
mix will continue to cure over the next few days at room temperature.
A new application of epoxy will no longer chemically link to it, so the surface must be 
thoroughly washed and sanded before recoating to achieve a good mechanical, 
secondary bond.  See Surface Preparation – page 10.

--- PAGE 9 ---
User Manual 7
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
Post curing
You can improve epoxy’s thermal performance and reduce the potential for fabric 
“print-through” by applying modest heat to the epoxy after it has cured to a solid 
state. Contact Wessex Resins for more information about post curing epoxy.
2.4 Dispensing and Mixing
Careful measuring of resin and hardener and thorough mixing of the two 
components are essential for a proper cure.  Whether the resin/hardener mix is 
applied as a coating or modified with fillers or additives, observing the following 
procedures will ensure a controlled and thorough chemical transition to a high 
strength epoxy solid.
Dispensing
Dispense the correct proportions of resin and hardener into a clean plastic, metal or 
wax-free paper container (Figure 2).  Do not use glass or foam containers because 
of the potential hazard from exothermic heat build-up.  DO NOT attempt to adjust 
the cure time by altering the mix ratio.  An accurate ratio is essential for a proper 
cure and full development of physical properties. 
Figure 2 Dispense the correct 
proportions of resin and hardener.
Dispensing with Mini pumps
Most problems related to the curing of epoxy can be traced to the wrong ratio of 
resin and hardener.  To simplify metering, use calibrated WEST SYSTEM Mini 
Pumps to dispense the correct working ratio of resin and hardener.  (For one 
full pump stroke of resin use one full pump stroke of hardener.)  Depress each 
pump head fully and allow the head to return completely before beginning the next 
stroke.  Partial strokes will give an incorrect ratio.  Read the pump instructions 
before using the pumps and verify the correct ratio before using the first mix on a 
project.  Recheck the ratio whenever curing problems are experienced.  One full 
depression of each pump will give approximately 24g of mixed epoxy.
1 stroke
Resin
1 stroke
Hardener
+
With Mini Pumps - 
One full pump stroke 
of 
resin 
for 
one 
full pump stroke of 
hardener will give the 
correct ratio.

--- PAGE 10 ---
User Manual 8
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
Dispensing without Mini Pumps—Weight/volume measure
To measure 105 Resin and 205 or 206 Hardener by weight, combine five parts 
resin with one part hardener.  Small quanities can be mixed by volume at the same 
ratio.  To measure 105 Resin and 207 or 209 Hardener by volume, combine three 
parts resin with one part hardener (by weight, 3.5 parts resin : 1 part hardener).
First time users
If using WEST SYSTEM epoxy for the first time, begin with a small test batch to 
get the feel for the mixing and curing process before applying a mix to the job in 
hand.  This will demonstrate the open time for the resin/hardener mix at the present 
ambient temperature and give assurance that the mix ratio is correctly metered.  
Mix small batches until confident of the handling characteristics of the epoxy.
Mixing
Thoroughly blend the two ingredients for 2 minutes - longer in cooler temperatures 
(Figure 3).  Scrape the sides and bottom of the pot when mixing.  If using the mix 
for coating, after mixing, quickly pour into a roller pan to extend the open time.  
scrape corners
Figure 3 Stir resin and hardener 
thoroughly together for 2 minutes, 
longer in cooler temperatures.
WARNING!  Curing epoxy generates heat.  Do not fill or cast layers of 
epoxy thicker than 10 to 12mm – thinner if enclosed by foam or other 
insulating material.  If left to stand for the full pot life in a plastic mixing 
cup, the mixed epoxy will generate enough heat to melt the plastic.  If a pot of mixed 
epoxy begins to exotherm (heat up), quickly move it outdoors.  Avoid breathing 
the fumes.  Do not dispose of the mixture until the reaction is complete and the 
material has cooled.
2.5 Adding Fillers and Additives
Fillers
Throughout this booklet, reference to epoxy or resin/hardener mixes is defined 
as mixed resin and hardener without fillers added; thickened mixes or thickened 
epoxy will mean mixed resin and hardener with fillers added.  Fillers are used to 
thicken epoxy for specific applications such as bonding or fairing.
After selecting an appropriate filler for the job in hand (selection guide - page 34), 
use it to thicken the epoxy to the desired consistency.  The viscosity or thickness of 
a mix required for a specific job is controlled by the amount of filler added.  There 
is no strict formula or measuring involved - visually judge the consistency which is 
best suited for the task in hand.  Figure 5 gives a general guide to the differences 

--- PAGE 11 ---
User Manual 9
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
between unthickened epoxy and the three other consistencies referred to in this 
manual.
Always add fillers in a two-step process:
1.	
Mix the desired quantity of resin and hardener thoroughly before adding 
fillers.  Begin with a small batch - allow room for the filler.
2.	
Blend in small quantities of the appropriate filler until the desired consistency 
is reached (Figure 4).  Ensure the filler is thoroughly blended before the mix is 
applied.
Figure 4 Stir in small quantities of filler 
until the desired consistency is reached.
For maximum strength, add only enough filler to completely bridge gaps between 
surfaces without sagging or running out of the joint or gap.  A small amount should 
squeeze out of joints when clamped.  When making fairing compounds, add as 
much 407 or 410 as can be blended in smoothly - for easy sanding, the thicker the 
viscosity, the better.  Spread the mix into a thinner layer, either around the inside of 
the mixing cup or onto a flat non-porous surface or palette, to extend the working 
life. 
CONSISTENCY
Unthickened
Slightly 
thickened
Moderately 
thickened
Maximum 
thickness
“SYRUP”
“KETCHUP”
“MAYONNAISE”
“PEANUT 
BUTTER”
GENERAL 
APPEARANCE
CHARACTERISTICS
Drips off vertical 
surfaces.
Sags down 
vertical surfaces.
Clings to vertical 
surfaces. Peaks 
fall over.
Clings to 
vertical 
surfaces. Peaks 
stand up.
USES
Coating, “wetting-
out” before 
bonding, applying 
fibreglass, 
graphite and 
other fabrics.
Laminating/
bonding flat 
panels with large 
surface areas, 
injecting with 
syringe.
General 
bonding, filleting, 
hardware 
bonding.
Gap filling, 
filleting, fairing, 
bonding uneven 
surfaces.
Figure 5 Epoxy can be thickened to the ideal consistency needed for a particular job.  The 
procedures in this manual refer to four common consistencies: syrup, ketchup, mayonnaise 
and peanut butter.

--- PAGE 12 ---
User Manual 10
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
Additives
Although additives are blended with mixed epoxy in a similar two-step process, 
they are not designed to thicken the epoxy.  Additives give the epoxy additional 
physical properties when used as a coating and pigments provide a colour base 
for future overcoating with quality marine paint.  Refer to the descriptions of the 
additives on page 48.