# 3.	 BASIC TECHNIQUES

The following procedures are common to the majority of repair or building projects 
– on the boat or in the home and regardless of the type of structure or material on 
which work is being carried out.
3.1 Surface preparation
Whether bonding, fairing or applying fabrics, the success of the application depends 
not only on the strength of the epoxy but also on how well the epoxy adheres to the 
surface to which it is being applied.  Unless bonding to partially cured epoxy, the 
strength of the bond relies on the ability of the epoxy to mechanically “key” into the 
surface.  Thus, the following three steps of surface preparation are a critical part of 
any secondary bonding operation.
For good adhesion, bonding surfaces must be:
1. Clean
Bonding surfaces must be free of any contaminants such as grease, oil, wax or 
mould release.  Clean contaminated surfaces with WEST SYSTEM 850 Solvent. 
(Figure 6).  Wipe the surface with fresh paper towels before the solvent dries.  
Clean surfaces before sanding to avoid abrading the contaminant into the surface.  
Follow all safety precautions when working with solvents.
2. Dry 
All bonding surfaces must be as dry as possible for good adhesion.  If necessary, 
accelerate drying by warming the bonding surface with a hot air gun, hair dryer or 
heat lamp (Figure 7).  Use fans to move the air in confined or enclosed spaces.  Be 
careful of condensation when working outdoors or whenever the temperature of 
the work environment changes.
3. Sanded
Thoroughly abrade hardwoods and non-porous surfaces with 80-grit aluminium 
oxide paper to provide a good mechanical “key” for the epoxy (Figure 8).  Ensure 
the surface to be bonded is solid.  Remove any flaking, chalking, blistering or old 
coating before sanding.  Remove all dust after sanding. 
The importance of the three operations detailed above cannot be stressed too 
strongly – for high strength, durable bonds, surfaces must be clean, dry and 
thoroughly abraded after removing previous surface coatings.

--- PAGE 13 ---
User Manual 11
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
Figure 
6 
Clean 
the 
surface.  Use a solvent, if 
necessary, to remove all 
contaminates.
Figure 7 Dry the Surface. 
Allow wet surfaces to dry 
thoroughly or use heat or a 
fan to speed the drying.
Figure 8 Sand non-porous 
surfaces.  Provide a texture 
for the epoxy to key into.
1
2
3
Primary/Secondary bonding
Primary bonding relies on chemical linking of 
adhesive layers such as the wet lay-up of fibreglass 
laminate in a mould.  All the layers of adhesive cure 
together in a single fused layer.  Epoxy applied over 
partially cured epoxy will chemically link with it to 
form a primary bond.  The ability to chemically link 
diminishes as the previous layer of epoxy cures and 
the bond becomes a secondary bond.
Secondary bonding requires a mechanical, 
rather than chemical linking of an adhesive to a 
material or cured epoxy surface.  The adhesive 
must “key” into pores or scratches in the surface 
- a microscopic version of a dovetail joint.  Correct 
surface preparation provides a texture that will help 
link the cured epoxy to the surface.
Special preparation for various 
materials
Cured epoxy - Amine blush can appear as a wax 
like film on cured epoxy surfaces.  It is a by-product 
of the curing process and is more noticeable in 
cool, moist conditions.  Amine blush can clog 
sandpaper and inhibit subsequent bonding but it is 
water soluble and can easily be removed.  It is not 
unreasonable to assume it has formed on any cured 
epoxy surface.  
To remove the blush, thoroughly wash the surface 
with clean water and an abrasive pad.  Dry the 
surface with fresh paper towels to remove the 
dissolved blush before it dries on the surface.  Sand 
any remaining glossy areas with 80-grit sandpaper 
and clean.  
Wet-sanding will also remove the amine blush.  If a 
release fabric (peel ply) is applied over the surface 
of fresh epoxy, amine blush will be removed when 
Removing epoxy
Removing uncured or non-
curing epoxy.  Scrape as 
much material as possible 
from the surface using a stiff 
metal or plastic scraper - warm 
the epoxy to lower its viscosity.  
Clean the residue with WEST 
SYSTEM 850 Cleaning Solvent. 
(Follow safety warnings on 
solvents and provide adequate 
ventilation).  Allow solvents 
to dry before recoating.  After 
recoating wood surfaces with 
epoxy, brush the wet epoxy 
(in the direction of the grain) 
with a wire brush to improve 
adhesion. 
Removing fibreglass cloth 
applied with epoxy.  Use a 
heat gun to warm and soften 
the epoxy.  Begin in a small 
area near a corner or edge.  
Apply heat until a putty knife 
or chisel can be slipped under 
the cloth.  Grab the edge with 
a pair of pliers and slowly pull 
up the cloth while heating just 
ahead of the separation.  On 
large areas, use a utility knife 
to score/cut the glass and 
remove in narrower strips.  
Resulting surface texture may 
be coated or remaining epoxy 
may be removed as follows.
Removing 
cured 
epoxy 
coating.  Use a heat gun to 
soften the epoxy.  Heat a small 
area and use a paint or cabinet 
scraper to remove the bulk of 
the coating.  Sand the surface 
to 
remove 
the 
remaining 
material.  Provide ventilation 
when heating epoxy.

--- PAGE 14 ---
User Manual 12
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
the release fabric is peeled from the cured epoxy and no additional sanding is 
required.
Epoxy surfaces that are still tacky i.e. not fully cured, may be bonded to or coated 
with epoxy without washing or sanding.  Before applying coatings other than 
epoxy (paints, bottom paints, varnishes, gelcoats, etc.), allow epoxy surfaces to cure 
fully, then wash, sand, clean and follow coating manufacturer’s instructions.
Hardwoods - Thoroughly abrade with 80-grit paper and remove dust before 
coating.
Teak/oily woods - Wipe the surface with WEST SYSTEM 850 solvent or pure 
acetone and when the solvent has evaporated, abrade with 80-grit paper.  Clean 
the sanding dust away and then wipe the abraded surface with solvent – the 
solvent dries the oil at the surface and allows the epoxy to penetrate.  Ensure the 
solvent has evaporated before coating but apply the epoxy within 15 minutes of 
the solvent wipe.
Porous woods - No special preparation needed but it is advisable to abrade with 
a medium grit paper to open pores.  Remove dust.
Metals - Metals must have all previous surface pre-treatments and contaminants 
e.g. rust removed, taking the surface back to the bare metal by thoroughly 
degreasing then abrading with a coarse paper such as 80-grit or grit blasting and 
then degreasing again. The use of an adhesion promoter is advised on non-ferrous 
metal substrates. Given below is the preparation for the more common metals 
used in boat building.
Mild Steel - Degrease and then thoroughly abrade (ideally, grit blast), removing 
all contamination to expose bright metal. Apply epoxy as soon as possible and 
certainly within 4 hours after surface has been prepared.
Stainless Steel - Degrease and then thoroughly abrade (ideally, grit blast), 
removing all contamination and the stainless coating to expose bright metal. Apply 
epoxy as soon as possible and certainly within 4 hours after surface has been 
prepared.  Then (wet) sand the epoxy into the surface.  Recoat or bond after first 
coat gels.
Aluminium - Non-anodised material must be degreased and either thoroughly 
abraded or chemically etched, (sulphuric acid/sodium dichromate solution or 
branded aluminium etch compound). 
Anodised aluminium and anodised aluminium alloys - must be bonded 
as quickly as possible after degreasing and abrading and certainly within 30 
minutes.
Hard anodised aluminium alloy - must be stripped by abrasive blasting or by 
etching in sulphuric acid/sodium dichromate solution or branded aluminium etch 
compound. Unstripped metal is not suitable for bonding.
Polyester/GRP - Remove contamination with WEST SYSTEM 850 Solvent.  
Thoroughly abrade with 80-grit paper to a dull finish and remove dust.
Ferrocement - Remove all previous paints and coatings by wet sand blasting - this 

--- PAGE 15 ---
User Manual 13
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
is less aggressive than using dry sand and should not damage the sound surface.  
If after blasting, laitance is visible on the surface or rust from the reinforcing wires 
can be seen, then it is necessary to wash with dilute solution of hydrochloric acid 
- this should be fresh water with a 4% to 5% addition of hydrochloric acid. Wash 
thoroughly with water and allow to dry completely before coating.
Concrete - Remove all previous coatings and abrade with a stiff wire brush.  
Remove all dust and debris before coating.
Plastic - Adhesion varies. If a plastic is impervious to solvents such as acetone, 
epoxy generally will not bond to it. Soft, flexible plastics such as polyethylene, 
polypropylene, nylon and Plexiglas fall into this category. Hard, rigid plastics such 
as PVC, ABS, polycarbonate and styrene provide better adhesion with good 
surface preparation and adequate bonding area. After sanding, flame oxidizing (by 
quickly passing the flame of a propane torch over the surface without melting the 
plastic) can improve bonding in some plastics.
It’s a good idea to conduct an adhesion test on any plastic (or any other material) 
that you are uncertain about.
For best results when working with plastic use WEST SYSTEM G/flex epoxy see 
Specialty Epoxies – page 44
3.2 Bonding (gluing)
This section refers to two types of structural bonding.  Two step bonding is the 
preferred method for most situations because it promotes maximum epoxy 
penetration into the bonding surface and prevents resin starved joints.  Single 
step bonding is occasionally used when joints have minimal loads and excess 
absorption into porous surfaces is not a problem.  In both cases, to achieve the 
ultimate bond strength, work the epoxy into the surface with a roller or brush.
Bonding
Joint strength - the ability to adequately 
transfer a load from one part to 
another - depends on the combined 
effects of three factors.
GLUE STRENGTH - Careful 
metering and thorough mixing 
will ensure the epoxy mixture 
cures to full strength.
ADHESION - For the best 
adhesion and load transfer, 
the surface must be correctly 
prepared.
JOINT AREA - The bonding or 
adhesive area of the joint must be 
adequate for the load on the joint. 
Increased overlap, scarf joints, fillets 
and reinforcing fibres across the joint 
can be used to increase bonding area.
Adhesion

--- PAGE 16 ---
User Manual 14
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
Before mixing epoxy, ensure all parts to be bonded fit properly and that surface 
preparation has been completed. (See surface preparation section 3.1 page 11).  
Gather all clamps and tools necessary for the operation and cover any areas that 
need protection from spills. 
Two-step bonding
1.	
Apply a resin/hardener mix to the surfaces to be joined (Figure 9).  This 
is called “wetting-out” or “priming” the bonding surfaces.  The epoxy is applied 
with a disposable brush in small or tight areas; wet-out larger areas with a foam 
roller or by spreading the resin/hardener mix evenly over the surface with a plastic 
squeegee/spreader.  Proceed with step two immediately or any time before the 
wet-out coat becomes tack free.
2.	
Modify the resin/hardener mix by stirring in the appropriate filler until it 
becomes thick enough to bridge any gaps between the mating surfaces and to 
prevent “resin-starved” joints.  Apply an even coat of the thickened epoxy to one of 
the bonding surfaces, sufficient so that a small amount will squeeze out when the 
surfaces are joined together (Figure 10).
Figure 9 Apply resin/hardener mixture to 
the bonding surfaces.
Figure 10 Apply thickened epoxy to one of 
the bonding surfaces.
As already stated, the thickened epoxy can be applied immediately over the wet out 
surface or any time before the epoxy becomes tack free.  For most small bonding 
operations, add the filler to the resin/hardener mix remaining in the batch that was 
used for the wet-out.  Mix enough resin/hardener for both steps.  Add the filler 
quickly after the surface is wet out and allow for a shorter working life of the mix. 
3.	
Clamp components.  Attach clamps as necessary to hold the components 
in place.  Use only enough clamping pressure to squeeze a small amount of the 
thickened mix from the joint, indicating that the epoxy is making good contact with 
both mating surfaces (Figure 11).  Do not squeeze all the thickened mix from the 
joint by using too much clamping pressure.
4.	
Remove or shape excess adhesive that squeezes out of the joint as soon as 
the joint is secured with clamps.  A WEST SYSTEM 804 mixing stick with one end 
sanded to a chisel edge is an ideal tool for removing the excess (Figure 12).  Allow 
to cure thoroughly before removing clamps.

--- PAGE 17 ---
User Manual 15
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
Figure 11 Clamp components in place 
before the epoxy gels.
Figure 12 Remove or shape excess 
epoxy that squeezes out of the joint.
Single-step bonding
Single-step bonding is applying a thickened epoxy mix directly to both bonding 
surfaces without first wetting out the surfaces with a resin/hardener mix.  However, 
it is strongly recommended that the epoxy is thickened no more than is necessary 
to bridge gaps in the joint (the thinner the mix, the more it can penetrate the surface) 
and this method is not used for highly-loaded joints or for bonding either end grain 
or other porous surfaces.
3.3 Bonding with fillets
A fillet is a cove-shaped application of thickened epoxy that bridges an inside 
corner joint.  It is an excellent technique for bonding components because the 
surface area of the bond is increased and serves as a structural brace.  All joints 
that will be covered with glasscloth will require a fillet to support the cloth at the 
inside corner of the joint.
The procedure for bonding with fillets is the same as normal bonding but, instead 
of removing the squeezed-out thickened epoxy after the components are clamped 
in position, the epoxy/filler blend is shaped into a fillet.  For larger fillets, as soon as 
the bonding operation is complete and before the squeezed-out epoxy becomes 
tack free, add more thickened mix to the joint and shape into a fillet.
1.	
Bond components as described in Bonding (page 13).
2.	
Shape and smooth the squeezed-out thickened epoxy into a fillet by drawing 
a rounded filleting tool (a mixing stick is ideal) along the joint, dragging excess 
material ahead of the tool and leaving a smooth cove-shaped fillet bordered on 
each side by a clean margin.  Some excess filleting material will remain outside 
the margin (Figure 13) which can be used to refill any voids.  Smooth the fillet until 
you are satisfied with the appearance.  A mixing stick will leave a fillet with about a 
10mm radius.  For larger fillets, an 808 Plastic Squeegee is recommended, cut to 
shape or bent to the desired radius.

--- PAGE 18 ---
User Manual 16
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
Figure 13 Shape and smooth the fillet.
Apply additional thickened epoxy to fill voids or make larger fillets.  Add sufficient 
mix along the joint line with the rounded mixing stick to create the desired size of 
fillet.  For longer or multiple fillets, empty caulking gun cartridges or disposable 
cake decorating bags can be used.  Cut the plastic tip to lay a bead of thickened 
epoxy large enough for the desired fillet size.  Heavy duty, sealable food storage 
bags with one corner cut off may also be used.
3.	
Clean up the remaining excess material outside the margin by using a mixing 
stick or a putty knife (Figure 14).  Glasscloth or tape may be applied over the fillet 
area before the fillet has cured (or after the fillet is cured and sanded).
Figure 14 Clean up the excess epoxy 
outside the fillet margin.
4.	
When the fillet has fully cured, sand smooth with 80-grit sandpaper.  Wipe the 
surface clean of dust and apply two or three coats of resin/hardener over the entire 
fillet area before final finishing.
3.4 Bonding fasteners and hardware
Installing screws and other threaded fasteners with WEST SYSTEM epoxy 
dramatically improves the load carrying capacity of the fastener by spreading the 
load into a greater area of the substrate.  There are several methods of hardware 
bonding dependent upon the loads carried by the hardware.
Basic fastener bonding
For improved pullout strength and eliminating moisture ingress, the easiest method 
is to simply wet out stripped fastener holes and new pilot holes before installing 
the screws.  Epoxy penetrates the fibre around the hole, effectively increasing the 
fastener diameter. 
1.	
Wet out a standard-size pilot hole and work the resin/hardener mix into the 
hole with a pipe cleaner or syringe (Figure 15).  Thicken a second coat of epoxy as 
necessary for stripped or oversized holes.

--- PAGE 19 ---
User Manual 17
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
Figure 15 Wet out a standard pilot 
hole and install the fastener.
2.	
Insert the fastener in the hole and allow the epoxy to cure.
Advanced fastener bonding
For greater strength and stability, drill oversized holes to increase the exposed 
substrate area and the amount of epoxy around the fastener.  If the fastener/
hardware can be clamped by other means, the oversized hole can be extended to 
the end of the fastener.
1.	
Drill oversized holes approximately 2/3 the depth of the fastener. The hole 
diameter is 6mm larger than the fastener diameter. (Figure 16a).
2.	
Drill a normal sized pilot hole at the bottom of the oversized hole to the full 
length of the fastener.  The normal sized pilot hole serves to hold or clamp the 
hardware in position until the epoxy cures.
3.	
Wet out the holes and the fastener with a resin/hardener mix.  Allow the 
epoxy to thoroughly soak into the exposed end grain of the wood.
a
b
1/3
2/3
x
x+6mm
Oversized
hole
Pilot hole
Epoxy interface 
with penetration 
into end grain.
Figure 
16 
Drill 
oversized 
holes 
to 
increase the exposed 
substrate 
area 
and 
the amount of epoxy 
around the fastener.
4.	
Fill the hole with thickened epoxy/adhesive filler.  Use 404 High-Density 
(preferred) or 406 Colloidal Silica.
5.	
Install the fasteners with just enough force to hold the hardware in place.  Allow 
the epoxy to cure thoroughly before applying load to the hardware (Figure 16b).
Bonding hardware
Bonding hardware goes much further than only bonding the fasteners.  By bonding 
the hardware base to the surface, the hardware load capacity is significantly 

--- PAGE 20 ---
User Manual 18
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
increased by providing a solid bearing surface for the hardware.  It also seals the 
wood underneath and is a stronger, longer lasting attachment than bonding the 
fasteners only.  It is especially useful to mount hardware on surfaces which are not 
level, curved or uneven.
1.	
Prepare the mounting surface and the hardware base for good adhesion (see 
surface preparation - page 10).
2.	
Wet out the oversized hole with epoxy.  Allow the epoxy to soak into the 
exposed end grain of the wood (as with fastener bonding).
3.	
Coat the bottom contact surface of the hardware with unthickened epoxy.  
Wire brush or sand the wet epoxy into the surface with 50-grit sandpaper.  Sanding 
the base, coated with epoxy, exposes the epoxy directly to fresh metal avoiding 
any oxidisation of the metal.
4.	
Inject a non-sagging epoxy/404 or 406 mix into the hole.  Use sufficient mix to 
ensure there are no voids in the hole after inserting the fastener.  Coat the bottom 
of the hardware and the fastener threads with thickened epoxy 
(Figure 17).
Figure 17 Coat the hardware bottom 
and the fastener threads with thickened 
epoxy.
5.	
Place the hardware in position.  Insert and tighten fasteners until a small 
quantity of mix squeezes out of the joint (Figure 18). 
Figure 18 Tighten the fasteners until a 
small amount of epoxy squeezes from 
the joint.
Backing Plate
6.	
Remove excess epoxy or shape into a fillet.  Allow the epoxy to cure for at 
least 24 hours at 15°C minimum before applying load to the hardware.  Allow more 
time in cool weather.
Casting a base
Use thickened epoxy to cast a base under the hardware when mounting hardware 
to a curved or uneven surface or mounting hardware at an angle to the surface. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
User Manual 19
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
1.	
Prepare the fasteners, holes, substrate and base as described above. 
2. 	
Bond small blocks to the substrate to support the base at the desired height 
and position (e.g., winch base, Figure 19”A”).
A
B
C
Figure 19 Support 
the base in position 
with blocking - apply 
enough 
thickened 
epoxy to fill the void.
3.	
Apply enough thickened epoxy – non-sagging, peanut butter consistency -  
to fill the volume below the required position of the hardware to a level marginally 
higher than the blocks.  If the gap between the base and the surface is over 12mm 
fill the gap in two separate layers to avoid exotherm. 
4.	
Place the hardware in position, resting on the blocks (Figure 19”B”) and install 
the fasteners.
5.	
Smooth the excess epoxy into the desired fillet shape around the base (Figure 
19”C”).  Allow the epoxy to cure fully before loading.  Protect exposed epoxy from 
UV. (see finish coating page 29).
Bonding studs
Bond threaded rods or studs into the substrate (instead of bolts or screws) and 
attach the hardware with nuts.  This variation is appropriate for many engine, motor 
or machine installations.  Coat the base of the hardware with wax/mould release 
to make it removable.  Although the hardware is not “bonded” to the substrate, the 
epoxy still provides a bearing surface that perfectly matches and supports the base 
of the hardware.
1.	
Prepare the studs/threaded rods by waxing the upper ends (above the 
surface) and cleaning the lower ends (below the surface). 
2.	
Place a nut and washer on the studs, wet out the lower ends and push them 
into the epoxy filled holes.  Allow the epoxy to cure thoroughly before attaching 
hardware and tightening the nuts (Figure 20).

--- PAGE 22 ---
User Manual 20
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
Figure 20 
Bond threaded 
rods or studs into 
the substrate as 
an alternative for 
easily removable 
hardware.
Removing fasteners
If a fastener needs to be removed at a future date, coat the threads with wax or 
mould release (contaminating the surface sufficiently to prevent a good bond).
Remove a permanently bonded fastener by applying heat to the head of the 
fastener with a soldering iron or propane torch.  Use a heat shield to protect the 
surrounding area.  Heat will travel down the fastener, softening the epoxy with 
which it is in contact.  After heating the epoxy should soften enough to allow the 
fastener to be backed out.  Allow more time for heat to travel along longer and/or 
larger diameter fasteners.
3.5 Laminating
The term “laminating” refers to the process of 
bonding together a number of relatively thin 
sheets, like plywood, veneers, fabrics or core 
material, to create a composite.  A composite 
may be any number of layers of the same 
material or combinations of different materials. 
Methods of epoxy application and clamping 
will differ depending on the materials being 
laminated.
A quick method to apply epoxy for laminating 
is to use a foam roller.  An even faster method 
for large flat surfaces is to simply pour the 
resin/hardener mix onto the middle of the 
panel/veneer/ fabric and spread the epoxy 
evenly over the surface with a plastic spreader. 
Apply thickened mixes with an 809 Notched 
Spreader.
Using staples or screws is the most common 
method of clamping when there is a solid 
Clamping 
Any method of clamping is suitable 
to prevent movement between the 
parts being joined.  Methods of 
clamping include spring clamps, 
“C” clamps and adjustable bar 
clamps, rubber bands cut from 
inner 
tubes, 
packaging 
tape, 
applying weights, and vacuum 
bagging.  When placing clamps 
near epoxy covered areas, use 
polyethylene sheeting or peel ply 
under the clamps so they do not 
inadvertently bond to the surface.  
Staples, nails or drywall screws 
are often used where conventional 
clamps are unsuitable.  Any 
fasteners that need to remain 
should be of a non-corroding alloy 
such as bronze.  In some cases, 
the thickened epoxy or gravity 
will hold parts in position without 
clamps. Avoid excessive clamping 
pressure.

--- PAGE 23 ---
User Manual 21
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
material on which to fasten.  An even distribution of weights will suffice when 
laminating over a base that will not hold mechanical fixings, such as a foam or 
honeycomb core material.
Vacuum bagging is a specialized clamping method for laminating a wide range of 
materials.  Using a vacuum pump and plastic sheeting, the atmosphere is used 
to apply perfectly even clamping pressure over all areas of a panel regardless of 
the size, shape or number of layers.  For detailed information on vacuum bagging, 
refer to 002-150 Vacuum Bagging Techniques.
3.6 Fairing
Fairing refers to the filling and shaping of low or uneven areas so they blend with 
the surrounding surfaces and appear “fair” to the eye and touch.  After major 
structural assembly has been completed, final fairing can be accomplished easily 
with WEST SYSTEM epoxy and low-density fillers.
1.	
Prepare the surface as detailed for bonding (page 10).  Sand smooth any 
bumps or ridges on the surface and remove all dust from the area to be faired. 
2.	
Wet out porous surfaces with resin/hardener mix (Figure 21).
3.	
Mix resin/hardener and 407 Low-Density or 410 Microlight® filler to a peanut 
butter consistency.  The thicker the mix, the easier it will be to sand when cured.
Figure 21 Wet out porous 
surfaces 
before 
applying 
fairing compound.
4.	
Trowel the thickened epoxy mix onto the wetted surface with a plastic spreader, 
working it into all voids and depressions.  Smooth the epoxy to the desired shape, 
leaving the mix slightly higher than the surrounding area (Figure 22).  Remove any 
excess thickened epoxy before it cures.  If filling voids over 12mm deep, apply 
the fairing mix in several applications allowing each application to partially cure 
before proceeding and/or use 206 Slow Hardener® or 209 Extra Slow Hardener™, 
depending on temperature.
Note: On vertical and overhead surfaces, allow the wet-out coat to gel before 
applying the fairing compound which may sag or slide off the fresh wet-out coat.  
Apply the fairing compound while the wet-out coat is still tacky.

--- PAGE 24 ---
User Manual 22
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
Figure 22 Apply fairing compound to fill 
all voids and smooth to shape.
5.	
Allow the final application of thickened epoxy to cure thoroughly.
6.	
Sand the fairing material to blend with the surrounding contour (Figure 23).  
Begin with 50-grit sandpaper if it is necessary to remove a lot of fairing material.  
Use 80-grit paper when close to the final contour.
Figure 23 Sand cured fairing compound 
to desired contour.
CAUTION! Wear a dust mask when sanding cured epoxy.  Remove the 
sanding dust and fill any remaining voids following the same procedure.
7.	
When satisfied with the fairness, apply two or three coats of resin/hardener 
mix to the area with a disposable brush or roller.  Allow the final coat to cure 
thoroughly before final sanding and finishing. Note: 410 filler can be affected by 
the solvents in most paints.  Surfaces faired with with 410 Filler must be sealed 
with epoxy before applying any solvented paints.
3.7 Applying woven cloth and tape
Glass cloth may be applied to surfaces by two methods to provide reinforcement 
and/or abrasion resistance.  It is usually applied after fairing and shaping are 
completed and before the final coating operation.  It is also applied in multiple 
layers i.e. laminated and in combination with other materials to build composite 
parts.
The “wet” method refers to the cloth being applied to an epoxy-coated surface 
before the coating reaches final cure.  The “dry” method is to apply the cloth over 
a dry surface and then impregnate the glass with epoxy.  The wet method is 
preferred whenever possible.
Wet method
By working with small quantities of epoxy, it is possible to work at a comfortable 
pace over quite large areas to be reinforced.

--- PAGE 25 ---
User Manual 23
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
1.	
Prepare the surface for bonding as discussed in 
surface preparation (page 10).
2.	
Pre-fit and trim the cloth to size.  Roll the cloth 
neatly so that it may be conveniently rolled back into 
position later.
3.	
Roll a heavy coat of epoxy on the surface.
4.	
Unroll the glass cloth into position over the 
wet epoxy.  Surface tension will hold most cloths in 
position.  (If applying the cloth vertically or overhead, 
it is possible to wait until the epoxy becomes a little 
tacky).  Work out wrinkles by lifting the edge of the 
cloth and smoothing from the centre with a gloved 
hand or a squeegee/spreader.  If cutting a pleat or 
notch in the cloth, lay it flat on a curve or corner, 
make the cut with sharp scissors and temporarily 
overlap the edges.
5.	
Any areas of cloth which appear to be dry, 
(white in appearance) apply more epoxy with a foam 
roller.
6.	
Remove the excess epoxy with a squeegee 
(Figure 24), using long overlapping strokes of 
uniform pressure.  The object is to remove the 
excess epoxy that may allow the cloth to “float off” 
the surface but avoid creating dry spots by exerting 
too much pressure on the squeegee.  Excess epoxy 
appears as a shiny area while a properly wet out 
surface appears evenly transparent with a smooth 
cloth texture.  Subsequent coats of epoxy will fill the 
weave of the cloth.
Figure 24 Squeegee away excess 
epoxy before it begins to gel.
7.	
Further layers of cloth may be applied immediately by repeating the steps 
above.
8.	
Trim the excess (Figure 25) and overlapped cloth after the epoxy has reached 
its initial cure.  The cloth will cut easily with a sharp utility knife as long as the epoxy 
is not fully cured.  If required, trim overlapped cloth as follows.
Clear wood finishes 
(stripper canoes, etc.)
An alternative wet out 
method is to lay the 
epoxy onto the fabric 
with a short bristled 
brush.  Dip the brush 
in the epoxy and lay 
the 
epoxy 
onto 
the 
surface 
with 
a 
light 
even stroke.  Do not 
force the epoxy into the 
cloth, which may trap air 
in the fabric and show 
through the clear finish.  
Apply 
enough 
epoxy 
to saturate the fabric 
and the wood below.  
After several minutes, 
lay on additional epoxy 
to dry (white) areas.  If 
epoxy 
appears 
milky 
due to high humidity or 
overworking, warm the 
surface by passing a 
heat gun or hair dryer 
over the surface.  Use 
low heat to avoid out-
gassing.  Be sure to use 
207 Hardener for clear 
finishes.

--- PAGE 26 ---
User Manual 24
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
Figure 25 Trim excess cloth after the 
epoxy gels but before it cures hard.
a)	
Place a metal straightedge on top of and midway between the two overlapped 
edges.
b)	
Cut through both layers of cloth with a sharp utility knife (Figure 26), being 
very careful not to cut too deeply.
Figure 26 Trim overlapped cloth after 
the epoxy gels.
c)	
Remove the top-most trimming and then lift the opposite cut edge to remove 
the overlapped trimming (Figure 27).
Figure 
27 
Remove 
the 
topmost 
trimming, lift the opposite cut edge to 
remove the overlapped trimming.
d)	
Re-wet the underside of the raised edge with epoxy and smooth into place.
The result should be a near perfect butt joint, eliminating double cloth thickness.  
However, a lapped joint is stronger than a butt joint, so if appearance is not 
important, it may be advisable to leave the overlap and fair in the unevenness after 
coating.  Alternatively use WEST SYSTEM 743 tapered edge cloth to eliminate the 
need to butt join, contact Wessex Resins & Adhesives or your local distributor for 
further information.
Any remaining irregularities or transitions between cloth and substrate can be 
faired by using an epoxy/filler fairing compound if the surface is to be painted.  Any 
fairing completed after the final glass cloth layer should receive several additional 
coats of epoxy over the faired area.
9.	
Coat the surface to fill the weave before the wet-out becomes tack free 
(Figure 28).  Follow the procedures for final coating in the next section.  It will take 

--- PAGE 27 ---
User Manual 25
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
two or three coats to completely fill the weave of the cloth and to allow for a final 
sanding that will not damage the cloth.
Figure 28 Coat the surface to fill the weave 
before the wet-out becomes tack free.
Dry method
1.	
Prepare the surface for bonding (see surface preparation page 10).
2.	
Position the cloth over the surface and cut it 30 mm larger on all sides.  If the 
surface area to be covered is larger than the cloth size, allow multiple pieces to 
overlap by approximately 50 mm.  On sloped or vertical surfaces, hold the cloth in 
place with masking or duct tape, or with staples.
3.	
Mix a small quantity of epoxy (three or four pumps each of resin and 
hardener).
4.	
On horizontal surfaces, pour a small pool of resin/hardener near the centre 
of the cloth but it is essential to use a roller or brush for wetting cloth on vertical 
surfaces.
5.	
Spread the epoxy over the cloth surface with an 808 Plastic Squeegee, 
working the epoxy gently from the pool into the dry areas (Figure 29).  As the fabric 
is wet out it becomes transparent, indicating the cloth has absorbed sufficient 
epoxy.  If applying cloth over a porous surface, ensure that sufficient epoxy is 
left to absorb into both the cloth and the surface below.  Try to limit the amount of 
squeegeeing as excessive “work” on the wet surface produces minute air bubbles 
which  are placed in suspension in the epoxy.  This is especially important if a clear 
finish is required.
Figure 29 Spread the epoxy over the 
cloth surface with a plastic speader.
6.	
Continue pouring and spreading (or rolling) small batches of epoxy from the 
centre towards the edges, smoothing wrinkles and positioning the cloth.  Check 
for dry areas (especially over porous surfaces) and re-wet as necessary before 
proceeding to the next step.  If cutting a pleat or notch in the cloth, lay it flat on 
a compound curve or corner, make the cut with a pair of sharp scissors and 
temporarily overlap the edges.

--- PAGE 28 ---
User Manual 26
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
7.	
Now refer to Steps 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 detailed above in the “wet method” to 
complete the procedure.
3.8 Epoxy barrier coating
The object of barrier coating is to build up an epoxy thickness that provides an 
effective moisture barrier and a smooth base for final finishing. 
Apply a minimum of two coats of WEST SYSTEM epoxy for an effective moisture 
barrier.  Apply three coats if sanding is to be carried out.  Moisture protection will 
increase with additional coats and, in the case of osmosis repair and protection, 
six coats or about a thickness of 600 microns must be applied.  Six coats, with 
422 Barrier Coat Additive™ in the final five coats, provides maximum moisture 
protection.  Additives or pigments should not be added to the first coat.  Do not 
add thinners or solvents to WEST SYSTEM epoxy.
Disposable, thin urethane foam rollers, such as WEST SYSTEM 800-3 or 800 
Roller Covers, allow greater control over film thickness, are less likely to cause 
the epoxy to exotherm and leave less stipple than thicker roller covers.  Cut the 
covers into narrower widths to reach difficult areas or for long narrow surfaces 
like stringers.  A paint brush can be used for smaller areas, if the bristles are stiff 
enough to spread the epoxy to an even film.
Complete all fairing and cloth application before beginning the final coating.  Allow 
the temperature of porous surfaces to stabilise before coating otherwise, as the 
material warms up, air within the porous material may expand and pass from 
the material (out-gassing) through the coating and leave bubbles in the cured 
coating.
1.	
Prepare the surface for bonding (see surface preparation page 10).
2.	
Mix only as much resin/hardener as can be applied during the open time of 
the mix.  Pour the epoxy into a roller pan as soon as it is mixed thoroughly.
3.	
Load the roller with a moderate amount of the epoxy.  Roll out the excess on 
the raised section of the roller pan to obtain a uniform coating on the roller.
4.	
Roll lightly and randomly over an area approximately 600mm x 600mm to 
transfer the epoxy evenly over the area (Figure 30).
Figure 30 Roll lightly and randomly 
over a small area.  Spread the epoxy 
into a thin even film.
5.	
As the roller dries out, increase pressure to spread the epoxy into a thin even 
film.  Increase the coverage area if necessary to spread the film more thinly and 
evenly.  The thinner the film, the easier it is to keep it even and avoid runs or 
sags in each coat.

--- PAGE 29 ---
User Manual 27
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
6.	
Finish the area with long, light, even strokes to reduce roller marks.  Overlap 
the previously coated area to blend both areas together.
7.	
Coat as many of these small working areas as possible with each batch.  If a 
batch begins to thicken before it can be applied, discard it and mix a fresh, smaller 
batch.
8.	
“Tip off” the coating by dragging a foam roller brush lightly over the fresh 
epoxy in long, even, overlapping strokes after each batch is applied.  Use enough 
pressure to smooth the stipple, but not enough to remove any of the coating 
(Figure 31).  Alternate the direction in which each coat is tipped off, 1st coat vertical, 
2nd coat horizontal, 3rd coat vertical, etc.  A WEST SYSTEM 800-3 Roller Cover 
can be cut into segments to make an excellent “tipping” brush.
Figure 31 Tip off the coating by dragging 
a foam roller brush lightly over the fresh 
epoxy.
Recoating
Apply second and subsequent coats of epoxy following the same procedures.  
Ensure the previous coat is still tacky, but has cured firmly enough to support the 
weight of the next coat.  To avoid sanding between coats, apply all coats in the 
same day. After the final coat has cured overnight, wash with clean water and 
abrade the surface to prepare for the final finish. See Special Preparation - Cured 
epoxy on page 11. 
3.9 WEST SYSTEM Epoxy and Barrier Coating 
for Osmosis repair.
Osmosis, otherwise known as gel-coat blistering, is a complex phenomenon.  The 
technical issues and repair instructions are contained in our specialist manual 
“Gelcoat Blisters, A guide to Osmosis repair”.  It is essential to fully read, 
understand, and follow the instructions contained in it when considering a treatment.  
Any such treatments should only be carried out under the close supervision of a 
qualified Marine Surveyor or by an experienced boatyard or Contractor who has 
clear evidence of successful past treatments.  Specialist yards or Contractors 
will have links with a qualified experienced surveyor and will usually obtain a full 
report prior to commencing a treatment.  We stongly recommend that advice is 
sought from a qualified Marine Surveyor concerning a particular hull prior to the 
commencement of any treatment.  Because of the variability of hull constructions 
and the complexity of the Osmosis phenomenon there can be no guarantee of a 
100% success rate in treatments.  Recurrence is always a possibility but by following 
these instructions we believe that the risks of recurrence will be minimised.

--- PAGE 30 ---
User Manual 28
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
3.10 Final surface preparation
Correct finishing techniques will not only add beauty, but will also protect surfaces 
from ultraviolet light which will break down the epoxy over a long period of time.  
The most common methods of finishing are painting or varnishing.  These coating 
systems protect the epoxy from ultraviolet light and require proper preparation of 
the surface before application.
Preparation for the final finish is just as important as it is for recoating with epoxy. 
The surface must be clean, dry and sanded and free of amine blush.
1.	
Allow the final epoxy coat to cure thoroughly.
2.	
Wash the surface with a Scotch-brite™ pad and water to remove the amine 
blush.  Dry with paper towels.
3.	
Sand to a smooth finish (Figure 32).  If there are runs or sags, begin sanding 
with 80-grit paper to remove the highest areas.  Sand until the surface feels and 
looks fair.  Complete sanding with the appropriate grit for the type of coating to be 
applied - check coating instructions.  Paint adhesion partly relies on the mechanical 
grip of the paint keying into the sanding scratches in the surface of the epoxy.  If 
a high-build or filling primer is to be applied, 80-100 grit is usually sufficient.  For 
primers and high-solids coatings, 120-180 grit may be adequate.  Finishing with 
180 grit paper is often recommended for coatings with high-gloss finishes.  Grits 
finer than this may not provide enough “tooth” for good adhesion and may promote 
sags and runs.  Always follow the paint manufacturer’s recommendations for 
surface preparation.  Wet sanding is preferred by many people because it reduces 
sanding dust and in addition, Steps 2 and 3 above become one operation.
Figure 32 Sand to a smooth finish.
4.	
When satisfied with the texture and fairness of the surface, rinse the surface 
with fresh water which should flow evenly without beading or fisheyeing.  If the 
rinse water forms into droplets or beads (a sign of contamination), wipe the area  
dry with a paper towel, then wet sand again until all water droplets are eliminated. 
(Figure 33).
Figure 33 Rinse the surface with 
fresh water after sanding.
Proceed with the final coating after the surface has dried thoroughly.  To reduce 

--- PAGE 31 ---
User Manual 29
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
the possibility of contamination, it is advisable to begin coating within 24 hours 
of the final sanding. Follow the paint manufacturer’s instructions but we suggest 
making a test panel to evaluate the degree of surface preparation required and the 
compatibility of the finish system.
3.11 Finish coatings
Coating function
Paint or varnish applied over an epoxy barrier coat is intended to decorate the 
surface and protect the epoxy from sunlight.  In so doing, the finish coating extends 
the life of the epoxy moisture barrier which, in turn, provides a stable base that 
extends the life of the finish coating.  Together, the two form a protective system far 
more durable than either coating by itself.
Protection from sunlight is a primary consideration in the selection of a final 
coating.  Long term UV (ultraviolet) protection of the barrier coat depends on the 
effectiveness with which the finish coating resists UV and retains it’s pigmentation 
and/or shield of UV filters on the surface of the epoxy barrier coat.  A high gloss 
finish reflects a higher proportion of the light from the surface than a dull finish.  
Therefore, a white - especially a high gloss white – coating is much more durable.
Coating Compatibility
Most types of coatings are compatible with cured epoxy which is an almost 
completely inert, hard plastic.  Thus, most paint solvents will not soften, swell or 
react with an epoxy surface.  However, it is advisable to build a test panel to assure 
coating compatibility.  It is always recommended to check manufacturer’s 
instructions to verify compatibility and suitability.
One-part polyurethanes and polyester gelcoat can be affected by epoxy amines 
and if used must be applied when the epoxy is thoroughly cured, generally after two 
weeks at room temperature. A thorough cure can be achieved much quicker with 
elevated temperature post curing. Post curing will also improve epoxy’s thermal 
properties and is recommended if dark paint is to be applied over epoxy.
Coating types
Latex paints are compatible with epoxy and they do an adequate job of protecting 
the epoxy barrier from UV radiation.  In many architectural applications latex paint 
may be the most suitable coating to use.  Their durability is limited.
Alkyd finishes - enamel, alkyd enamel, marine enamel, acrylic enamel, alkyd 
modified epoxy, traditional varnish and spar varnish - offer ease of application, low 
cost, low toxicity, and easy availability.  Their disadvantages are low UV resistance 
and low abrasion resistance.
One-part polyurethanes offer easy application, cleanup and better properties than 
alkyds.  They are also more expensive and some may be incompatible with amine 
cured epoxy systems such as WEST SYSTEM epoxy, although 207 Hardener 
offers good compatibility.  Test first.

--- PAGE 32 ---
User Manual 30
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
Two-part linear polyurethane (LP) paints offer the most durable protection 
available.  LP’s are available as pigmented or clear coatings and offer excellent 
UV protection, gloss retention, abrasion resistance and complete compatibility with 
epoxy.  However, compared to other types of coatings, they are expensive, require 
more skill to apply and present a greater health hazard, especially when sprayed.
Epoxy paints are available in one-part and two-part versions.  Two-part epoxies 
offer many characteristics similar to the higher performance polyurethanes.  They 
are durable and chemically resistant, but offer limited UV protection compared to 
the linear polyurethanes.
Antifouling paints are available in a variety of formulations.  Most antifouling paint 
systems are compatible with epoxy and can be applied directly over a prepared 
epoxy barrier coat.  If unsure of compatibility or having curing or adhesion problems 
with a specific paint, use the primer recommended for that antifouling paint over the 
barrier coat.  Follow the recommendations given for preparation of GRP surfaces.  
Other paints, including marine LP’s and primers, are not recommended for use 
below the waterline.
Primers are usually not needed to bond a paint film to epoxy, although interfacing 
primers may be required with some specialised bottom paints and high-build 
primers are useful for hiding scratches or flaws in the substrate.  If the instructions 
on the selected paint or varnish recommend a specially primed surface, follow the 
recommendations given for fibreglass preparation.  Self-etching primers are not 
effective on an epoxy coating because of the chemical resistance of the epoxy.
Polyester gelcoat is a pigmented version of polyester resin used to build GRP 
boats and many other products.  Gelcoat provides a smooth pre-finished surface 
and is applied during the production process of the boat or component part.  It is 
not often used as a post-production finish coating, but it can be applied over epoxy 
and is useful in some repair situations.  Unreacted epoxy will interfere with gelcoat 
cure.  Refer to 002-550 Fibreglass Boat Repair & Maintenance, published by 
Wessex Resins, for detailed information on patching gelcoat over an epoxy repair.
Always follow the instructions from the manufacturer of the coating systems.  
Nevertheless, as previously stated, it is recommended to make a test panel to 
evaluate the degree of surface preparation required and the compatibility and 
handling characteristics of the finish system.

--- PAGE 33 ---
User Manual 31
WEST SYSTEM User Manual