# 4.	 COLD TEMPERATURE BONDING

Epoxy can be used under cold weather conditions, but special application techniques 
should be employed to achieve acceptable long-term epoxy performance.  These 
precautions are not elaborate or difficult and do not apply to WEST SYSTEM 
epoxy alone - any epoxy used at low temperatures may have its capabilities and 
performance affected which could promote significant problems if the epoxy is used 
in critical marine structural situations.  In fact, due to differences in formulation, not 
all epoxies possess the necessary characteristics to perform well when used under 
cold weather conditions.  The precautions are not elaborate or difficult.
4.1 Chemical characteristics
When an epoxy resin and hardener are mixed together, a chemical reaction is 
started which produces heat - an “exothermic reaction”.  The ambient temperature 
in which an epoxy chemical reaction takes place affects the rate or speed of this 
reaction.  Warmer temperatures accelerate, while cooler temperatures retard the 
reaction time.
If the reaction is too slow, even though the epoxy may harden, it may not cure 
completely and possibly never achieve its designed physical properties.  This 
is where danger lies, for improperly cured epoxy may possess enough strength 
to hold a structure together, yet may fail after repeated loadings during normal 
operation.
4.2 Working properties
Temperature has a profound effect on the working properties of uncured epoxy.  
Ambient temperature changes will dramatically change the viscosity (thickness) of 
the epoxy.  When cold, the viscosity of water varies little with temperature changes 
until it freezes but temperature can have an effect that is 10 times greater on epoxy 
molecules than on water molecules over a temperature change of 15°C.  Because 
of this, the colder it is, the thicker the epoxy becomes, significantly reducing its flow 
properties.  This change has three important consequences for working with epoxy 
under cold conditions.  
a.)	
It is more difficult to mix the resin and hardener thoroughly.  The resin flows 
through the dispensing pumps and out of containers with much greater difficulty 
and both resin and hardener are prone to clinging to the surfaces of the pumps, 
containers and mixing tools.  Remember, because of the low temperature, the 
chemical reaction is much slower and compounding a less efficient exothermic 
reaction with the potential for incomplete and/or inaccurate mixing, is a recipe for a 
permanently deficient bond.
b.)	
The mixed epoxy is much harder to apply because the viscosity is similar to 
cold honey and is extremely difficult to coat and wet out surfaces.  
c.)	
Air bubbles may be introduced when mixing and remain in suspension 
due to the increased surface tension of the cold epoxy.  This can be especially 
troublesome in clear-finish applications and osmosis repair work.

--- PAGE 34 ---
User Manual 32
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
4.3 Cold weather techniques
Having explained that cold weather epoxy usage is both difficult and potentially 
dangerous, with a little advance planning and taking certain simple precautions, 
the problems detailed above can be addressed and their consequences avoided.  
The following six basic cold weather rules have been used for over 25 years and 
we have yet to experience a cold weather curing problem with WEST SYSTEM 
epoxy.
1. Use WEST SYSTEM 205 Fast Hardener.
WEST SYSTEM 205 Hardener has been designed with a chemically-activated 
polyamine system which exhibits a good cure at temperatures as low as 5°C.  It 
exhibits a fast cure characteristic and offers less uncured exposure time thereby 
reducing the chances of incomplete cure due to cold temperatures.
2. Dispense resin and hardener in the proper mixing 
ratio.
All epoxies are formulated to a specific mix ratio of resin to hardener.  It is important 
to mix epoxy in the precise ratio recommended by the manufacturer.  Increasing 
the amount of hardener will not accelerate cure but it will seriously compromise 
the ultimate strength of the cured epoxy.  NOTE:  WEST SYSTEM Mini Pumps are 
designed and calibrated to dispense the correct ratio with one pump stroke of resin 
for every one pump stroke of hardener.
3. Warm resin and hardener before using.
As discussed above, the warmer the resin and hardener, the lower the viscosity.  
Thinner (lower viscosity) resin and hardener will flow through dispensing pumps 
better, cling less to containers and mixing equipment and exhibit superior handling 
and wet-out characteristics.
The two epoxy components can be warmed using heat lamps or kept in a warm area 
until they are needed.  Another simple method of warming the resin and hardener 
is to construct a small hot box out of rigid sheets of foil-backed insulation.  Place 
a regular light bulb or an electric heating pad inside to maintain a temperature no 
greater than 30°C.
4. Stir the resin and hardener thoroughly.
Use extra care when mixing the resin and hardener and mix for a longer period 
of time than normal.  Scrape the sides and bottom of the mixing container using 
a mixing stick to reach the edges.  Using a smaller diameter mixing pot will also 
improve the chemical activity because the limited surface area will contain the heat 
produced by the reaction.
5. Warm working surfaces.
Applying warmed epoxy to a cold structure will quickly retard the molecular bonding 
activity of the epoxy.  Ensure the structure and the surrounding area is brought up 
to temperature.  A hull, for example, which is colder than the surrounding air may 

--- PAGE 35 ---
User Manual 33
WEST SYSTEM User Manual
exhibit condensation and this moisture could contaminate the epoxy when it is 
applied.  Warm the structure as much as possible.  This can be done by constructing 
tents around small areas and heating with portable heaters or warming the area 
with hot air guns or heat lamps.  Small components or materials e.g. glass cloth, 
can be warmed before use in a hot box as described in Paragraph 3 above.
6. Prepare surfaces carefully between applications.
When coating under cold conditions, a thin film of epoxy does not generate much 
heat.  The rate or speed of cure is therefore extended and some reaction with 
moisture in the atmosphere may occur, resulting in the formation of an amine blush 
on the cured surface.  Immediately prior to applying subsequent coatings, wash the 
surface with clean water, allow it to dry thoroughly and sand.
4.4 Cold weather storage
WEST SYSTEM materials should be stored above 10°C with the container caps 
screwed down tightly.  Storing epoxy resin in extreme cold may cause crystallization 
but the formation of crystals does not compromise the resin and the situation can 
be remedied.  Heat water in a pot large enough to hold the epoxy resin container.  
Remove the lid of the resin container to avoid pressure build-up and place the 
container in the hot water.  Be careful to ensure no water enters the resin container.  
Stir the epoxy with a clean stick until the liquid regains clarity and all crystals have 
melted.  Remove from the water, replace the lid tightly and invert the container to 
melt any crystals which may be clinging to the top of the container.  If the resin 
pump has crystallized, pumping warm resin through should dissolve the crystals.
To keep WEST SYSTEM epoxy at a constant temperature construct a HOT BOX, 
as shown below.
30cm
60cm
30cm
Box constructed using 
6mm plywood and WEST 
SYSTEM 
epoxy/filler 
mixed to peanut butter 
consistency to create 
fillet joints.
Wooden blocks for feet to 
keep WEST SYSTEM epoxy 
off a cold floor and to make 
lifting easier.
40W 
light 
bulb 
to 
maintain 
a 
temperature 
of 
around 15 - 20°C.
Magnetic catches 
to 
keep 
the 
door secure and 
maintain heat.
Dimensions:
Note:
This 
box 
is 
designed to warm 
a WEST SYSTEM 
epoxy 
‘B’ 
Pack. 
The 
dimensions 
should be altered 
accordingly for use 
with ‘C’ Pack sizes.

--- PAGE 36 ---
User Manual 34
WEST SYSTEM User Manual