# 1. MAINTENANCE

^yn may define Maintenance as work 
carried out on a glider to prevent 
deterioration, or to delay its effects, while 
repairs may be defined as operations to 
rectify damage. These two definitions are 
clearly not perfect since they do, in a sense, 
overlap. However, they are good enough 
for our purposes.
Let us deal with Maintenance first. How- 
ever much money we lay out on the pur- 
chase of a brand new "Super-Heaven" sail- 
plane, it will, from the moment we take 
delivery, begin to deteriorate. 
But, by 
taking a little thought, and putting in some 
work on it, we can keep that sailplane in 
virtually brand new condition. 
The first 
thing we must deal with is: 
Lubrication
It is more or less axiomatic that, where 
metal rubs on metal, some lubricant should 
be used to reduce friction and prevent wear. 
In the general structure and control system 
of gliders, the moving parts are all slow- 
moving, and for this purpose the best 
lubricant is a good quality grease. 
Un- 
fortunately most manufacturers are rather 
stingy in the matter of fitting grease nipples, 
which enable grease to be pumped in with a 
grease gun. Unless this can be done, it is 
extremely difficult to get the grease into a 
bearing, and no amount of grease slapped 
on the outside of a bearing does any good 
at all. Probably the best method may be 
said to be: "take it apart, grease it, and put 
it together again."
There is a good deal to be said for the use 
of heavy oil, about SAE 140, for control 
systems, particularly for control surface 
hinges. Where the latter are of the usual 
pin-and-split pin type, the only satisfactory 
way to get grease into them is by taking 
them apart. Slapping grease on the outside 
only seems to result in a frightful-looking 
sort of toffee-apple of dust, sand and mud 
forming around the hinge. To strip every 
hinge is a long job. Now, heavy oil does 
creep into the bearing surfaces, and it does 
not take long to go round a glider and put a 
drop on each hinge.
The points which do require regular 
attention are as follows: 
1. The release hooks.
2. All control surface hinges.
3. All pulley bearings (bearings only 
please).
4. Stick 
bearings and torque tube 
bearings.
5. All control lever bearings and the pins 
which connect the levers to the rods or 
cables.
6. Landing wheels unless of the sealed 
ball-bearing type.
You cannot do any harm by over- 
lubricating provided (and this is important) 
the oil or grease goes where it is meant to go. 
You can do a good deal of harm by allowing 
oil or grease to get into places where it 
should not be. Therefore take great care 
that no lubricants get into the wrong places. 
These are as follows: 
1. On to any timber. If left, the timber 
will soak up the oil and eventually 
become rotten.
2. On to any fabric. 
The same will 
happen.
3. On to any cables. The result of this is 
that the oil, or grease, will collect grit 
and form a grinding compound which 
will wear away the cable where it 
passes over pulleys, or through fair 
leads.
4. On to any rubber. If left, the rubber 
will dissolve into a horrid sticky mess.
If you should accidentally spill a little oil 
in any of these places, wipe it up at once; it 
will save you a lot of work in the end.
Finally, how often should you lubricate 
your glider? This is a difficult question, as 
so much depends on the conditions under 
which the glider operates and is stored. 
You will be fairly safe, however, if you 
make a rule to do it about every 20 hours' 
flying, or once a month at least.
Corrosion
This is the chief enemy of the STEEL in 
your glider. 
There are several ways of 
combating it, but all of them depend on 
covering the metal with a protective skin. 
Some steel parts are cadmium or chromium 
plated, but the most usual method is by the 
use of some sort of paint. The principle to 
follow is this: keep the protective skin 
intact. 
If you see any rust developing, 
remove it carefully with a wire brush or fine 
emery cloth and repaint. If you have to do
 1-

--- PAGE 9 ---
this, please make sure that the corrosion 
has not weakened the fitting appreciably. 
If it has done so, you must replace it with a 
new fitting. There are a few metal parts 
which cannot be painted, such as spar pins, 
etc. 
These must be kept covered with 
grease.
There is one other place where corrosion 
must be guarded against, and that is 
wherever wood and steel touch. Wherever 
there is plate fitted onto a wooden member 
or wherever steel bolts pass through 
timbers, there is a chance of corrosion due 
to the moisture in the timber itself. If you 
have to replace bolts or plates in these 
conditions, make sure that both wood and 
steel have a liberal coating of chromate 
jointing compound before assembly.
Timber and Plywood
Both these will deteriorate if they are 
allowed to become too wet or too dry. The 
timber and ply was in its best condition 
when your machine was built, and your aim 
should be to keep it so. Therefore ensure 
that the protective covering on all the wood- 
work is kept intact and touch up with the 
paint brush whenever necessary. This is 
particularly important if your machine is 
built with casein glue as damp will cause a 
fungus to form and attack the glue.
Fabric
When the fabric was applied to your 
machine it was doped to tighten it, and to 
make it waterproof. The doping scheme 
ought to have included in it at least one 
coat of aluminium dope to make it opaque 
as well, although there are still some 
machines flying with clear-doped fabric. 
The main enemies of fabric are ultra-violet 
light, which rots the fibres, and oil, water 
or acid which will eventually destroy it. 
Therefore, keep these things away from 
fabric as far as you can. If the doping was 
properly done, the fabric should be im- 
pervious to water so the odd shower of rain 
will do no harm. However, if water gets 
inside the wing, it may be able to soak the 
fibres of the fabric, so keep the drainage 
eyelets clear. Ultra-violet light is a thing you 
cannot do much about, except to avoid sun- 
light for unnecessarily long periods; and in 
any case, if the doping is really opaque, the 
ultra violet light will be prevented from 
getting at the fabric. In brief, keep the 
fabric clean, and do not let the sun get at it 
more than necessary.
Instruments
Modern aircraft instruments are ex- 
tremely reliable bits of mechanism, and if 
anything does go wrong with them, it is 
generally much better to send them either 
to the manufacturers, or to a specialist firm 
for overhaul. The difficulty is that even if 
one knows what is wrong with them, they 
must be checked for accuracy after any 
adjustment, and this almost always requires 
a special calibrating gadget of some sort. 
However, to prevent trouble developing, the 
following points should be borne in mind: 
1. Use good quality rubber pipe for the 
connections, and replace it whenever 
there are any signs of perishing.
2. Keep moisture and dust out of 
instruments and their piping.
3. Do not subject instruments to rough 
treatment, shocks, etc., and do not 
blow into Air Speed Indicators or 
Variometers.
Cables
Most gliders use cables in their control 
circuits, and it is most important to keep 
the cable tensions correct. If the tension is 
too slack there is a risk >f turnbuckles 
fouling ribs or bulkheads, while if the cable 
is too tight the fittings may be subjected to 
unnecessarily large loads. The effect of "g" 
on cable loads must not be overlooked. In a 
loop, for example, the elevator cable of most 
gliders is subjected to quite a big increase in 
tension, since it is only supported at two 
points about 15 feet apart. Due to the extra 
"g," it tries to sag, and if the tension was 
tight to start with, the increase of tension 
may be very great.
Cables tend to stretch and shrink as the 
temperature increases or decreases, so they 
may require adjusting fairly frequently. 
While on this point, remember that a sail- 
plane sitting on the ground in a temperature 
of 75°F. or more, on a fine sunny summer's 
day, may well be at 8,000 ft. a short time 
later, where the temperature will probably 
be around freezing point; so do not over- 
tighten the cables in summer.
What is the correct tension for cables? 
This is a very difficult matter to describe in 
print, and is much better learnt by an actual 
demonstration on a glider. However, here 
are two rough guides. On a machine such 
as a Tutor with no mass balance on the 
elevator, the tension in the elevator cable is 
about right if the stick will just fall forward 
due to the weight of the elevators. On a
•2—

--- PAGE 10 ---
machine like the Olympia, the cable is about 
right for tension if you just cannot feel a 
"tight-spot" in the elevator movement. 
This latter case is of course complicated by 
the fact that the elevator is partially mass- 
balanced, so the first method does not work 
properly. Use these tensions as a guide tc 
the setting of aileron cables. Rudder cables 
on most gliders are bungee-tensioned in the 
nose of the machine, and in this case they 
look after themselves as regards tension. 
We are assuming, of course, in all these 
tests, that the control circuit is properly 
lubricated.
Safety and Locking
All parts of a glider must be so fitted and 
locked that there is no risk of anything 
working loose or coming undone. We can 
consider turnbuckles first. One commonly 
used type has a barrel in which there is a 
socket at each end with right and left 
handed threads. Into these sockets screw 
the eyebolts. With this type, all the threads 
of the eyebolts must be inside the barrel if 
the turnbuckle is "in safety" or able to 
develop its full strength. 
If any threads 
show, then the cable must be increased in 
length, by the addition of links, etc., to 
allow full engagement of all the threads. A 
second type of turnbuckle, found on
Locking wire,
Olympias and other gliders, consists of a 
right and left handed screw for the central 
portion, and this fits into two sockets which 
are swaged onto the ends of the cable. In 
this type the central screw is threaded 
almost up to the middle, and there is a 
different method of determining whether 
sufficient threads are engaged with the 
sockets to provide full strength. On each 
socket will be found a small hole, about 
f inch from the mouth of the socket, and 
this is the "safety hole." The socket is "in 
safety" if the screw has been screwed in past 
this hole. This must be verified, either by 
looking into the hole or by feeling with a 
pin or piece of wire. This type of turnbuckle 
also has two brass locknuts which should be 
screwed back against the sockets when the 
adjustment is correct. 
In spite of these 
locknuts, the turnbuckle must be properly 
wire-locked as described below.
All turnbuckles must be locked against 
possible movement. Soft iron locking wire 
is generally used for this, and it can be 
bought, galvanised, very cheaply at any 
ironmongers. 
There are two accepted 
methods of locking turnbuckles. The first, 
shown in Fig. 1 (a), is done by passing a 
length of wire through the hole in the 
middle of the barrel, bending the ends up 
and passing them through the eyebolts or
At least 3 full turns
\
(a)
Safety hole
Locking wire
Cable
At least 3 full turns
(b)
Fig.

--- PAGE 11 ---
fittings. The ends are then wrapped round 
the shanks of the eyebolts (and the wire 
itself) for at least three full turns, but 
preferably more.
The second method, sometimes called the 
"figure-of-eight" lock, is preferable where 
the turnbuckle is in an inaccessible place, 
and the wrapping round of the ends is a 
difficult job. 
In the screw type of turn- 
buckle, each socket will be found to contain 
some more holes. One, near the cable end, 
is a little blind hole and was used by the 
makers to ensure that the cable was fully 
home before it was swaged in. This hole 
does not concern us, but near it is a hole 
right through the socket. This is the locking 
hole. The wire passes through this hole, 
crosses through the hole in the central 
screw, through the locking hole in the other 
socket, and the two ends are twisted together 
with at least 3 full turns (preferably more) to 
form a complete figure-of-eight as shown in 
Fig. 1 (b). This may seem more complicated 
than the first method, but you will find that 
it is not. One can usually fiddle the wire in 
easily enough, but often the wrapping down 
of the ends is very difficult in a confined 
space, using the method of Fig. 1 (a). The 
advantage of the second method is that
WRONG
once the wire is threaded into place, and the 
ends brought together, a pair of pliers can 
be used to twist up. 
Whatever type of 
locking is used, always fold down ends of 
wire so that no fouling can occur.
Bolts are used all over the structure of 
most gliders, and all bolts must be locked 
so that there is no danger of the nut 
accidentally working loose. One simple way 
of locking a bolt is to bash the end over 
until it is riveted over the nut. 
This is an 
admirable method for bolts which, you 
hope, are never going to be undone. The 
snag is that if ever you do have to take the 
bolt out, it, and its nut, must be scrapped 
and a new bolt and nut fitted. The next 
method is by means of a castellated nut and 
split pin fitted through a hole in the bolt. 
This is very satisfactory, but in awkward 
places attempts to get the split pin into 
place can lead to much bad language. There 
are on the market a number of so-called 
locking washers which do the job quite well. 
They have a serious disadvantage, however, 
in that all of them tend to cut the fitting and 
the nut with their locking elements, teeth, 
claws or whatever you like to call them. 
You will do well to avoid them on gliders.
Lastly we come to the Stiff nuts, Nyloc,
CORRECT
Thread
in 
shear
Thread
in 
bearing
Washer
No
-, 
thread 
in shear 
or bearing
Fig. 2
_4

--- PAGE 12 ---
Simmonds nuts or Pinnacle nuts. These are 
self-locking nuts and they really are self- 
locking. They have none of the snags of the 
above methods and should be used when- 
ever possible. One small point: make sure 
that the bolt thread does go right through 
the nut, otherwise the self-locking element 
may not be able to do its job. These nuts 
may be used over and over again, but reject 
any which do not seem to be reasonably 
tight on the thread. As a rough guide, if you 
can screw the nut right on with your fingers 
it should be scrapped. Some manufacturers 
prefer to use slotted nuts and split pins in 
control circuits, etc., where there is a chance 
of the bolt rotating, and you should always 
use the same method as the manufacturer.
One method of locking which is some- 
times seen should not be used on gliders. 
This is the practice of screwing down a 
second nut tight onto the first one. It is an 
unreliable method and usually damages the 
bolt threads.
When replacing bolts with new ones, 
make sure that the new bolt is the correct 
length. Bolts should not be fitted with their
threads in shear or in bearing. 
Fig. 2 
should make this clear.
For this reason a washer should always be 
fitted, and you should check that the 
straight portion of the bolt does actually 
reach right through the fitting but not 
through the washer.
Wing pins should be good fits in their 
holes and should be kept greased. 
The 
usual way of locking these is to fit safety 
pins, though if a machine is only very rarely 
derigged, it is a good plan to use split pins 
and washers. These do not rattle so much, 
and are not so liable to catch on clothing, 
etc. This can be a danger with safety pins in 
exposed places, and it is quite easy to pull 
open a safety pin unnoticed from this cause.
Finally, a few general points. Never use 
a split pin more than once. Always use the 
correct size of split pin or safety pin. Always 
use non-cprrodible split pins. Do replace 
locking wire with new if you have to unlock 
a turnbuckle. Do watch for corrosion, bad 
fabric, slack fittings, hinges, faults in wood- 
work finish, etc., and deal with these 
matters at once.
OTTLEY MOTORS LTD.
Established over 30 years as repairers of all types of mechanical 
devices, including engine overhauling and tuning.
Manufacturers and repairers of all types of motor bodies, chassis, etc.
Finishes on metal and wood of all descriptions including cellulose 
and varnish.
Designers and Manufacturers of the
Ottfur Release Gears. Suitable for
Sailplanes and Aero Tugs.
Manufacturers and repairers of all types of Sailplanes and Gliders. 
Machines collected and delivered.
A.R.B. Approved.
Fully experienced staff for all department!. 
Estimates free.
11 CRESCENT ROAD, WOOD GREEN, 
LONDON, N.22
Telephone: BOWES PARK 4568 
  _

--- PAGE 13 ---
2. REPAIRS. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
J^EPAIRS are usually the result of 
accidental damage to a glider. They 
may be necessary, however, as a result of 
bad maintenance, or plain old age. If you 
carry out the necessary maintenance on 
your glider conscientiously, you should be 
able to eliminate almost entirely repairs due 
to bad maintenance, but it is obvious that 
no part of a glider can be considered to last 
for ever, and will, sooner or later, require 
replacing or repairing.
The first thing to remember about any 
sort of repair is that you must only use 
approved materials in your repair. When 
the machine was designed and built, great 
care was taken to ensure that every part of 
the glider was strong enough for its job. 
Quite as much care was taken to see that no 
part was unnecessarily strong, for in this 
case the glider would be heavier than it need 
be. Now, in calculating the strength of all 
the pieces of the glider, the designer used as 
a basis the known strength of approved 
aircraft timber, spruce, ply, etc. and the 
known strength of various specification 
steels. If you, subsequently, go and replace 
some of these high-quality materials with 
any old bits of wood, or metal, your repair 
may look all right but it will most certainly 
be all wrong.
An Inspector of Aircraft Materials is a 
highly skilled man, who has at his disposal 
a fair amount of testing equipment, and 
nobody suggests that we should all become 
Inspectors and set up our own test labora- 
tories. But you must and this cannot be 
stressed too highly you really must make 
sure that nothing goes into your glider 
which has not been tested and approved. 
The best way of doing this is to buy your 
supplies from reputable firms and to insist 
upon an Approved Certificate or Release 
Note for whatever you buy. All good firms 
issue these Notes as a matter of course and 
usually the material, wood, ply or metal, 
bears a stamp or mark which is quoted on 
the Release Note. 
All repairs must, of 
course, be entered up and signed for in the 
glider's log book, and against the entry for 
the repair you should enter the number and 
date of the Release Note for the materials 
used in the repair. It is, if you like, your 
proof that you did use proper aircraft 
materials for the job. The name "Release
—6-
Note" puzzles some people. It is merely a 
note issued by an Inspector that he has 
examined the material in question, that he 
is satisfied that it is up to standard and that 
it may be "released" from store for use on 
aircraft.
A good repair on any aircraft must 
satisfy four requirements: 
1. It must be at least as strong as the 
original structure.
2. It must be as nearly as possible as 
rigid, or stiff, as the original structure 
but neither more nor less so.
3. It must not be appreciably heavier 
than the original structure.
4. All protective coverings, paint, dope, 
etc., must have been made good.
If, when you have completed a repair, you 
can honestly say that it fulfils all four of 
these requirements, then you have every 
right to call it a good repair.
Let us take these four requirements in 
order.
No. 1, strength, is obviously vital, for on 
it may depend your life. First, there must 
be no doubt as to the material in the repair. 
This is satisfied so long as only Approved 
materials are used. 
Secondly, the repair 
scheme must be worked out and splices, 
etc., made correctly. 
For many jobs, 
standard repair schemes can be employed 
which have been found satisfactory by many 
tests. If no standard repair scheme can be 
used for a particular repair, then one must 
be worked out. This means that you must 
plan what damaged material has got to be 
cut out, how you are going to replace it, 
where the joints are going to be, and 
whether any temporary structure has got to 
be fitted to hold the component secure while 
the repair is made and glue is setting. This 
matter is dealt with more fully in a later 
chapter. If the repair is a replacement of a 
component, then this aspect of the job is 
simple.
Your workmanship must be of aircraft 
standard. Now, this does not imply fan- 
tastic skill. Any normal person can fairly 
quickly acquire sufficient skill with wood- 
working tools, and files, and hacksaws, to 
produce first-class repairs. The operations 
in themselves are relatively simple, but you

--- PAGE 14 ---
must make sure that nothing but first-class 
work goes into your repair. All wood joints, 
splices, etc., must fit. If they do not, then 
they must be chiselled, filed, sandpapered, 
until they really do fit. Unless the repair is a 
relatively small one, in which case you can 
use the damaged parts as patterns, you will 
need to obtain drawings of the damaged 
component, and you must make sure that 
the sizes of timber and thicknesses of ply, 
dimensions of gussets and all other details 
are exactly as called for in the drawing.
One might be forgiven for thinking that, 
if a repair is strong enough, then it is satis- 
factory. Things are not quite as simple as 
this, however, and this is where this business 
of stiffness comes in (our No. 2 Require- 
ment). Take, for example, the spar of a 
cantilever wing. The booms, or flanges, of 
the spar are carefully tapered, being thick 
at the wing root where the big bending loads 
act, and thinning out at the tip where the 
loads are lighter. Built like this, the whole 
spar will bend evenly and smoothly like a 
well-designed bow. Now, suppose we make 
a repair to the spar somewhere near the 
middle of the wing, and, misguidedly, we 
beef it up with lots of timber and make it 
very stiff at this point. The spar will now 
not be able to bend, or flex, at the repair 
point, and in consequence it will throw a 
lot' of extra load onto the sections of spar 
at the ends of our repair. If it fails, it will
not fail at our repair. Oh no! Our repair is 
much too strong, but it will fail at the ends 
of the repair. Do not get the idea that we 
have somehow weakened the spar at these 
points. The spar here is as good as ever. 
What we have done, though, is to put a lot 
of extra load onto these points in the spar  
extra load which they were not designed to 
cope with and which ought to have been 
spread over the repaired portion evenly. 
The net result is that the spar as a whole is 
weaker than it should be.
Requirement No. 3, that the repaired job 
should not be appreciably heavier than the 
original, will, in general, be satisfied if the 
repair satisfies our first two requirements as 
to strength and stiffness. A repair is almost 
bound to involve some extra weight, but 
this should be kept as small as possible. In 
all big repairs, and any repairs which are a 
long way from the centre of gravity of the 
glider, the machine must be re-weighed, and 
its new centre of gravity determined. Any 
alteration in weight or C. of G. position 
will alter the permitted maximum and 
minimum pilot weights.
Requirement No. 4 should be only 
common sense. Apart from appearances, 
it is clearly lunacy to spend time and money 
on a good repair job without making sure 
that, when the job is finished, the elements 
cannot get at your work and destroy it.
Sailplane and Gliding
The sports only magazine 
PUBLISHED EVERY OTHER MONTH
60 pages of illustrations and articles for the gliding enthusiast all over
the world.
17s. Annually (U.S.A. $3.00) or Single Copies 2s. lOd.
from: 
BRITISH GLIDING ASSOCIATION
LONDONDERRY HOUSE, 
19 PARK LANE, LONDON, W.I

--- PAGE 15 ---