# 3. TIMBER AND PLY REPAIRS, GLUES

ALL the wooden parts of a glider are held 
together by some sort of glue, so we 
might well begin this chapter with a dis- 
sertation on glues and their properties. 
First, let us realise that a properly made 
glued joint is actually stronger than the 
wood that it is holding together. This is true 
of all Approved glues and, of course, you 
must use no other. This means that if you 
make a test joint, and then tear it apart after 
the glue has set, the joint will not break in 
the glue line but will tear away the wood 
fibres from one side of the joint.
Now, to get this strength from a glue 
joint the glue has got to be used properly. 
Glue must always be used in shear, and 
never in tension. Fig. 3 should make this 
clear.
Glue
Glut,
fb).RIGHT
Fig. 3
In Fig. 3(a) the glue line is in tension, i.e. 
is tending to be torn apart, and a joint made 
like this is hopelessly weak. In Fig. 3(b) the 
jointed pieces of wood are not so much 
being torn apart, but more trying to slide 
one over the other. The glue line is in shear 
and its strength is enormous. Also please 
note that in the latter method we can make 
the area of the glue surface as big as we like 
by making the slope shallower and therefore 
longer.
Glue must always get right down at the 
wood, so the joints must really fit properly 
before gluing up. Equally important, the 
wood surfaces must be clean, and this does 
not simply mean scraping off any paint. It 
means that, after sanding the surfaces, you 
must not touch them even with clean hands. 
The perspiration from even clean fingers will 
be left on the joint and the oiliness will 
interfere with the proper penetration of the 
glue. Lastly, the joint must be so held or 
clamped so that no movement is possible 
until the glue has set.
Aircraft glues, in the U.K. at any rate, are 
of two main types: Casein Glues and 
Synthetic Resin Glues.
Casein Glue is a white powder and is 
made from milk by a chemical process. 8
Mixing instructions are always included 
with the powder and should always be 
followed exactly, since the different makes 
of glue have slightly different mixing tech- 
niques. A typical mixing method is: mix 
the powder and cold water to a thick creamy 
consistency, allow to stand for 20 mins. and 
the glue is ready for use. Three hours (or 
sometimes four, depending on the make of 
glue) after mixing, the batch must be thrown 
away and a new batch mixed. Casein glue 
does not simply dry out like a gum, but it 
sets by chemical reaction. It is an excellent 
glue improperly used. It is not "gap filling", 
and in consequence the workmanship and 
cleanliness of surfaces must be of the highest 
order. In use, it is spread evenly over both 
surfaces of the joint, which are then 
clamped together with as much pressure as 
possible, short of damaging the timber 
fibres. 
Setting time varies with different 
makes and the ambient temperature, but is 
of the order of 24 hours.
Casein glue is waterproof, but it has one 
serious disadvantage. If it gets wet, it is 
liable, being an organic substance, to fungus 
attack; and once this starts, the glue joint is 
rapidly destroyed. To guard against this, 
casein glued aircraft are usually sprayed 
internally with a light coat of shellac.
Casein glue is not much used these days, 
but there are quite a number of older gliders 
still flying which are casein-glued through- 
out. In case of repair, it is better to use the 
same type of glue as was used in the original 
structure, so these machines should be 
repaired with casein glue.
The most widely used Synthetic Resin 
Glue, in the U.K. at any rate, is Aerolite. 
This is really a plastic which has been 
arrested in its hardening and so remains 
liquid. 
The hardening process can be 
started by bringing the glue into contact 
with a catalyst or Hardener. 
In conse- 
quence, this is what is called a Double 
Application Glue. 
In use, the glue, a 
whitish treacly liquid known as Aerolite 
300, is spread evenly on one piece of wood, 
and the Hardener, a liquid usually stained 
with a dye to assist identification, is spread 
over the other piece, the surfaces having 
been carefully prepared. When all is ready, 
the two pieces of wood are brought together 
and clamped in position while the hardener- 
treated surface is still damp. This last point

--- PAGE 16 ---
is most important. The clamping pressure 
need not be anything like so great with this 
glue; in fact, the best joint is ensured when 
the pressure is only just sufficient to 
guarantee that the surfaces are in proper 
contact all over the joint. This glue is said 
to be gap-filling, but this must not be made 
an excuse for inferior workmanship.
Setting begins immediately the glue 
touches the hardener, so the two must never 
come into con tact except as above described. 
Setting times vary enormously with tem- 
perature, and, if suitable heat can be 
applied, may be reduced to an hour or so. 
Times also vary depending on which speed 
of hardener is used. This is made in three 
speeds, 
"Rapid" 
(coloured 
amber), 
"Medium" (coloured green), and "Slow" 
(coloured violet). 
The last two will be 
found the most useful for glider repairs, and 
it is a good rule to use the slower hardener 
if you have a choice, since this allows more 
time for tacking or clamping up. 
The 
available times for this are quoted on the 
manufacturer's instructions sheet. 
These 
hardeners can be obtained undyed, or 
colourless, but their use is not recom- 
mended. The purpose of the dye is to prove, 
conclusively, that the hardener has been 
used. The makers of this glue, Messrs. Aero 
Research, Ltd., of Duxford, Cambridge- 
shire, supply, with every batch, full in- 
structions for use, and temperature/setting 
time tables for the various speeds of 
hardeners. When using this glue, some form 
of artificial heating must be used if the 
temperature is below 40°F. This can usually 
be quite easily arranged, a favourite method 
being to fix ordinary electric light bulbs 
with some form of reflector around the 
joint. It is quite surprising what a lot of 
heat can be applied in this way. Hot water 
bottles will also be found useful on 
occasions.
Being a plastic, the glued joint is un- 
affected by moisture, fungus attack, or 
anything else. However, in its liquid form, 
Aerolite 300 does tend to harden very slowly 
and for this reason the store life of the glue 
is three months from date of manufacture. 
After this period the glue must be thrown 
away, or, at any rate, not used for aircraft 
work, though it may be quite good enough 
for trailer repair and 
suchlike. The 
hardeners have an indefinite store life.
The makers also produce the same glue 
in powder form. This is known as Aerolite 
306, and when mixed with water, in the
—9
correct proportions, forms Aerolite 300. 
The advantage of this is that, in powder, the 
glue has a store life of two years, so that 
batches of glue can be mixed up as required. 
This is a very convenient way of using 
Aerolite, but make sure that the mixing is 
done in the correct proportions and that all 
air bubbles are removed from the glue 
before use. This may take one or two days. 
Keep in an airtight jar, or a skin will form 
on the surface. This skin will not re-dissolve 
and must be removed.
Finally, do keep the glue and hardener 
apart at all times. If one drop of hardener 
accidentally spills into the glue pot, that 
glue is infected and must be thrown away.
Aero Research, Ltd., also make another 
glue known as Aerodux. This is not often 
come across, but it is an excellent glue. 
It is a Synthetic Resin, but has one snag 
from our point of view. It is very slow 
setting in fact, its full strength is not 
developed until about seven days after the 
joint is made. This does not matter much 
from the constructional point of view, but it 
is a serious drawback when considering 
repairs. This glue is a red treacly liquid and 
the hardener is a white powder. 
When 
required for use, the correct amount of the 
hardener powder is stirred into the glue. 
The glue is then ready for use and remains 
usable for a few hours depending on the 
temperature. This glue is applied to both 
surfaces to be joined, and the joint is 
clamped up in the usual way. This glue has 
much to recommend it when building a 
large component or repairing a spar, since 
the time element is much less critical. 
Initial setting is fairly quick a matter of a 
few hours, but final hardening to produce 
full strength as stated above is rather a 
lengthy business. This glue is used fairly 
widely in the manufacture of rotor blades 
for 
helicopters, 
and 
other 
high-duty 
applications.
Timber Repairs
It will help you enormously if you can 
obtain a copy of A.P. 2662A entitled 
"Standard Repairs to Airframes". Although 
it bears on its cover the statement "Promul- 
gated for the information of all concerned", 
someone has decreed that this is a "Re- 
stricted" publication and cannot be bought 
by the public. 
It may be difficult for 
ordinary intelligence to see quite how the 
Queen's enemies might benefit by the

--- PAGE 17 ---
possession of this book; but, as we all 
know by now, "the man in Whitehall knows 
best . 
However, the British Gliding 
Association will probably be able to obtain 
a copy for you, provided you can satisfy 
them that you are not a lunatic, or an 
anarchist.
There are, in this book, many worked-out 
schemes for the repair of almost every type 
of damage, and if you follow the scheme 
appropriate to the job you are repairing, 
you can hardly go wrong.
However, if you cannot obtain a copy of 
A.P. 2662A, we had better consider timber 
repairs from first principles. 
Timber is 
joined to timber by glue and nothing else. 
Any odd tacks, or screws, you may find are 
virtually unstressed, and were fitted to 
ensure that the gluing up of the original 
joint was satisfactory. This, of course, does 
not apply where you find a metal component 
screwed to a wooded one, e.g., a skid shoe 
on a main skid. Therefore, when we have to 
make good any damage to a wooden struc- 
ture, we must do it by means of wood and 
glue alone.
Most gliders are built of spruce for the 
main load-carrying members, with birch or 
gaboon plywood for skinning and bracing 
bulkheads, or forming spar webs, etc. Let 
us consider repairs to spruce members first. 
Basically there are two main types of 
glued joint; the lapped joint and the 
scarfed joint. The lapped joint is normally 
only used for trivial repairs or repairs to 
comparatively lightly loaded members.
,Oack
Fig. 4
Fig. 4 shows a patch repair using a lapped 
joint to repair the top boom of a wing rib. 
In this case the patch piece must be of the 
same dimensions as the original boom, the 
ends must be chamfered down to a slope of 
at least 5 to 1 and the parallel portion of the 
patch piece must be at least ten times the 
thickness of the original boom. The patch 
piece is simply glued into position and 
cramped or clipped until the glue has set. 
For this purpose, bulldog clips, or spring- 
type clothes pegs, will be found very useful.
This is a very simple and quick repair but 
its disadvantages are obvious. 
We have 
made the job heavier, and we have increased 
the stiffness of the boom. 
These disad- 
vantages are not very important in a small 
repair of this nature, and the boom is a 
comparatively lightly stressed member, so 
we can call this a satisfactory repair. Note 
that the ends of the patch piece must be 
chamfered to avoid the sudden change of 
stiffness there would otherwise be.
Except on trivial repairs and lightly 
stressed members, this system is not good 
enough, and we must look for a better way.
This better way is the scarfed joint, and is 
illustrated in Fig. 5.
Ftath«r-edge-
-10-
Fig. 5
To make the scarfed joint the two ends of 
the pieces of wood are planed, shaved, and 
filed down until they fit as shown in the 
figure, and then glued. The length of the 
scarf must be at least 12 times the thickness 
of the wood, but should be 15 times if it is 
possible to make it so. Never forget that a 
long splice is much easier to make than a 
short one, and the glued area is corres- 
pondingly greater so that a better joint 
results. A 12 to 1 scarf, or splice is satis- 
factory, but the individual scarfs must fit 
absolutely perfectly. It is a very good rule 
to make all scarfed joints in solid members 
to slope at 15 to 1 for this reason, and only 
use the 12 to 1 slope if it is absolutely im- 
possible to use the full length of 15 to 1.
One further point needs a little considera- 
tion. This is the feather edge, or point of 
each scarfed piece. It is clearly vulnerable 
either during the gluing, or later in service. 
If the member is subjected to any bending 
in the plane of the glue surface, then any 
tendency for the feather edges to lift will 
cause a crack to try to creep in and force the 
scarfed surfaces apart. To prevent this, it is 
a good plan to glue, over the feather edge 
points, a reinforcing strip. 
Now, A.P. 
2662A shows reinforcing strips made from 
spruce. In general on gliders our repairs 
will be made on much thinner sections than 
is usual on Service aircraft, and ply rein- 
forcing strips are quite satisfactory. The 
strip should be at least 6 T long on the

--- PAGE 18 ---
parallel portion (T being the thickness of 
the repaired member) and the ends must be 
chamfered down to a slope of at least 5 to 1 
as shown in Fig. 6.
Ply skin.. No reinforcing strip requd.
5 tol Chamfer
Fig. 6
If one side of the scarf is glued against a 
ply skin, as shown on the upper side of the 
scarf in Fig. 6, then of course no reinforcing 
strip is needed, since the skin performs this 
job. The grain of the strip must run, on the 
outer veneers, parallel to the grain in the 
scarfed member. As regards thickness of 
strip, -jk in. ply will serve for members 
f in. square to about f in. square, and 
proportionately, though above J in. square 
sections it is probably better and easier to 
use spruce reinforcing strips of a thickness 
of i T where T is the thickness of the 
member.
Do not let the fitting of a reinforcing strip 
be an excuse for inferior workmanship. Its 
purpose is solely to prevent the possibility 
of the points of the scarf from working 
open. The strength of the joint must be in 
the scarfed joint itself.
Plywood Repairs
Here again we have two basic types of 
glued joint, the lapped joint and the 
scarfed joint. The lapped joint is mainly 
used in patching minor damage. Patches of 
ply should be of the same thickness and 
grain direction as the original ply and should 
be glued onto the back, or inside, of the 
panel. All edges should be chamfered down 
at a slope of 5 to 1. Patching is useful for 
repairing odd cracks, holes, etc., in lightly 
stressed panels of ply, provided these are 
small and of minor importance. Do not 
use this method for important ply panels 
such as leading-edge ply, etc. For this type 
of repair, as, in fact, for the majority of 
ply repairs, scarf joints must be used.
You know, by now, that you must only 
use Approved plywood, but here is a word 
of warning. 
You will come across two 
different types of plywood in glider con- 
struction. The first, or ordinary plywood, 
consists of three veneers of wood, the outer
two veneers being laid so that the grain 
runs parallel with the length of the sheet, 
while the centre veneer is laid so that its 
grain runs at right angles to the two outer 
veneers i.e., runs across the sheet. This 
is the most common type of plywood. The 
second type, sometimes called Shear Ply, 
Diagonal Ply, or 45° Ply, is a high-duty ply- 
wood used in positions of great stress such 
as spar webs and, sometimes, leading-edge 
ply. In this ply the outer veneers are each 
laid at 45° to the long edge of the sheet. 
This ply has enormous strength in shear, 
and must never be replaced by ordinary ply.
Grain is very important in ply panels, 
and all replacements, insertions and patches 
must be arranged so that the grains run as 
in the original structure.
Making scarfed joints in plywood is 
basically the same procedure as in solid 
timber, with a few exceptions. The length 
of the scarf must be nine times the ply 
thickness no more and no less. If you try 
to make the scarf longer, you will almost 
certainly lose strength through the feather 
edges breaking. A shorter scarf is not up to 
strength. No reinforcing strips are required, 
but, of course, any fabric used as a protective 
covering must be made good. 
The scarf 
must be very accurately made, the surfaces 
must be really flat and must fit perfectly 
before gluing up. This is made easier by the 
laminated form of plywood, since a good 
scarf shows three straight stripes, of equal 
width, where the three veneers have been 
shaved down. Mark off your scarfs with a 
pencil line before you start and shave down 
with a file rather than a plane. The latter is 
rather too greedy and tends to break up the 
feather edge. The new "carrot grater" type 
files with replaceable blades will be found 
very useful for scarfing ply.
All ply scarfs must be backed; i.e., there 
must be a rib or frame behind the scarf, or 
it is impossible to close the scarf for gluing. 
Moreover, the backing must be at least 
three-quarters of the width of the scarf, and, 
if necessary, the rib, or frame, must have a 
strip of timber glued alongside it to make it 
up to this thickness. If there is no rib or 
frame to use, then you must fit a backing 
piece, glued into place. Never try to scarf 
onto thin air, i.e., without backing; it is a 
waste of time.
If you consider that a backing piece is 
materially increasing the stiffness of the 
structure at the repair, it may be advisable 
to remove it again after the repair is finished.
—11-

--- PAGE 19 ---
The usual method of closing up a scarf 
joint in ply is by means of a tacking strip. 
This is a strip of plywood about an 
inch wide which is tacked down over the 
scarf. The operation is made much easier 
if prepared strips, with the tack already 
stuck in them, are made up beforehand. 
When the joints have set, these strips are 
removed and the tacks drawn out again. 
As a general principle, all tacks should be 
removed after a repair. If you find, as you 
may, that on a particular job some tacks 
cannot be removed owing to inaccessibility, 
then these tacks must be of brass. Otherwise 
steel tacks may be used, but these must be
Tacks bent over,
Support 
right up/ 
to edge
Packing 
strip
Tacking strip 
and tacks
n_-
-Frame
This width to be at 
least 3M of scarf length
Fig. 7
removed or corrosion will set in and damage 
the timber. Fig. 7 shows a typical ply scarf 
repair.
There is another type of repair which falls 
rather between the two types described 
above. This is the Flush Insertion type of 
ply repair. It is useful where damage is too 
big for a small patch but not sufficient to 
justify scarfing in a new panel. It is made by 
cutting out the damage to an oval shape or 
rectangle with radiused corners and gluing 
in a "biscuit" of ply inside the panel. Do 
not make the hole circular unless you can 
get at both sides of the panel, otherwise you 
will not be able to get the biscuit through 
the hole. When the biscuit has been glued 
in, a patch can be cut to fit the hole exactly 
and glued into place. All outer edges of the 
biscuit should be chamfered to a 5 to 1 
slope, and all laps should be at least 1 inch. 
Fig. 8 shows a sketch of this type of repair. 
It is not used much on gliders since the 
panels in general are fairly small, and usually 
it is easier to scarf in a new piece onto the 
nearest frames or ribs.
When replacing a damaged panel of ply 
with a new one, if you have to make a scarf
INSERTED PLY PATCH
Biscuit
Ply Panel
Fig. 8
joint at a place where there was originally a 
scarf joint, do not worry about the direction 
of the original scarf. If the new joint is in 
the same direction as the old one, then things 
are easy. Simply shave down to the old 
scarf joint, clean off all old glue until you 
have a good timber surface, and glue in 
your prepared scarfed panel in the ordinary 
way. However, if the old scarf ran in the 
opposite direction, then ignore it. Scarf in 
the new panel as usual. The joint will be 
amply strong. Fig. 9 shows a cross section 
of a new scarf running in the opposite 
direction to an old one.
New Scarf
Line of 
Old Scarf
Fig. 9
This procedure of a new scarf crossing an 
old one should be avoided in solid spruce 
members. 
The question does not really 
arise since normally we can put our splices 
in these members more or less anywhere we 
like, whereas in ply panels we have to make 
them where there is sufficient backing, i.e., 
on frames or ribs.
Whenever gluing ply, it is important that 
the surfaces are properly sanded before 
gluing, since the process of manufacture 
tends to close up the pores. 
12-

--- PAGE 20 ---