# 4. METAL REPAIRS

'J'HE metal parts of most gliders are, in 
general, much better replaced, if worn or 
damaged, rather than repaired. There are 
a few exceptions to this rule but not many. 
For instance, skid shoes wear out fairly 
rapidly if gliders are operated on hard 
surfaces, and it is quite a simple matter to 
cut off the worn part of a mild steel main 
skid shoe and weld on a new piece of sheet 
steel. Tailskid shoes also can be repaired 
in this way, though in this case a thin plate 
of cast iron welded on to the sole of the 
tailskid shoe, and then quenched to leave it 
glass hard, seems to stand up to hard work 
better than anything. However, apart from 
trivial things like these, no welding must be 
done on any aircraft structure except by an 
A.R.B. approved welder. This is an absolute 
hard-and-fast rule, and you break it literally 
at your peril.
If metal parts of a glider become distorted 
or worn, replace them. The only real excuse 
for repairing or reconditioning them is 
when the parts are difficult to obtain, as may 
be the case when the glider is a "one off" job.
One instance of this is when the wing/ 
fuselage pins become worn. 
The easiest 
method of dealing with this is to replace the 
wing and fuselage fittings and to fit new 
pins. If you cannot get them you must think 
again. You may be able to ream the holes 
oversize and fit oversize pins, but you must 
not do this until you have received the 
manufacturer's approval. The new pins will 
have to be made, not only of Approved 
steel, but of the actual specification called 
for on the drawings. The snag with this 
system is that the components are then 
non-standard, and, while this does not 
matter on a "one off" glider, it's a darned 
nuisance on a popular type of machine, 
since its parts will not fit any other machine 
of the same type and vice versa.
Metal fittings must be inspected frequently 
for any signs of corrosion or damage. It is 
often not realised that even a light scratch 
can be the starting point of a fatigue crack; 
so keep fittings clean and painted, and do 
not scribe things on them. In this connection 
the writer has seen a Sky sailplane whose 
owner, misguidedly, had scored a line across 
the top spar joint fittings to assist him in 
rigging. Why he could not have painted a 
line on these fittings was not explained. The
latter plan would have been quite useful, 
but the scored line across this heavily stress- 
ed fitting is simply asking for fatigue trouble. 
Fatigue in metal is a most deadly thing. 
Fortunately in our gliders we find very little 
High Tensile Steel used. Nearly all fittings, 
bolts, etc., are made of Mild Steel (although 
it is an aircraft specification mild steel), and 
its behaviour under repeated loading, such 
as would produce fatigue failure, is perfectly 
predictable, unlike some light alloys. This 
means that there is no danger whatever 
from fatigue so long as the fittings are in 
good condition. If, however, the fittings are 
allowed to become corroded or scratched, 
there will be concentrations of stress at the 
weakened points, and this will cause cracks 
to grow from them. For the same reason, if 
a fitting is overstrained it must be replaced. 
Release hooks, in this country at any 
rate, are almost all of the Ottfur type. This 
type is a safety hook, in that it will throw 
out the cable ring if the cable pull exceeds 
a certain angle, as will happen if a pilot 
forgets to pull the release at the top of a 
winch launch. It is most strongly recom- 
mended that no other type of quick-release 
hook be used, and also that only approved 
winch rings be used on launching cables. 
The practice of making up rings locally 
from any old mild steel bar is a very 
dangerous one; the rings may distort under 
load, and it is possible for a distorted ring 
to jam in the release. An approved winch 
ring cannot possibly jam, and it is not an 
expensive item. Nose hooks, intended for 
aero-towing, on some gliders, are locked by 
a pin or bolt. This prevents the release hook 
from "back releasing" and is intended to 
safe-guard against an accidental release 
occurring when the tow cable surges and 
develops an undue amount of slack. This 
might be awkward if you were over the 
middle of the Channel at the time! These 
nose hooks must not be used for winch 
or auto-tow launching unless the locking 
pin, or bolt, is first removed.
These Ottfur release hooks are made in 
several forms, differing mainly in the 
position, and direction of pull, of the 
opening lever. Apart from replacing broken 
springs, etc., it is a waste of time and effort 
trying to repair or recondition them. Messrs. 
Ottley Motors Ltd., the manufacturers, run 
13-

--- PAGE 21 ---
a service for rebuilding these hooks, and the 
charge is so small and the service so quick 
that it is far and away the simplest and 
cheapest way of overhauling them. Your 
hook comes back to you as new, repainted 
and proof tested, and with a Release note 
certifying it O.K.
These release hooks work on what is 
known as the "Over Centre Mechanism" or 
"Toggle Joint". 
This is much better 
understood with the aid of a diagram. Fig. 
10 shows the basic works of a release hook. 
The "back-releasing" action is not shown 
since that is obvious immediately on 
examination of an actual hook.
In the figure the release is shown locked 
(upper drawing) and open (below). In the 
upper sketch it will be obvious that no 
pull, however heavy, on the jaw of the hook 
can open it, since the pivots of the links are 
slightly over the straight-line position AB 
(hence the name "Over Centre Mechanism"). 
The links are merely forced against the stop. 
At the same time quite a small force P, 
applied at the opening lever, is enough to 
lift the links off the stop, and once they pass 
the straight-line position the release will fly 
open into the position shown in the lower 
drawing. A little thought will show that 
the position in which the links come to rest 
in the locked position is rather critical. A 
small alteration here has a very large effect 
on the pull necessary to operate the release 
when under load. Wear in the pivots affects 
the locked position and should be guarded 
against by proper cleaning and lubrication 
of the innards of the release. 
A worn 
release usually requires more pull to open 
it under load.
To check a release for wear, put a finger 
on the jaw of the hook and try to waggle it 
to and fro in the opening and closing direc- 
tion. This will give you a good idea of the 
amount of slack in the link pivots. Then 
waggle it from side to side. This shows up
Stop
CABLE
OPEN
Fig. 10
any wear in the hook pivot. If in doubt, 
compare the amount of slack with that in a 
new or reconditioned release. See that the 
mainspring round the hook pivot inside the 
frame, and the back-releasing spring on the 
outside of the frame, are unbroken and have 
not become weakened. The mainsprings 
particularly are liable to weakening after 
long service, or they may break off one 
"leg". This can usually be detected by the 
flappy feel of the mechanism when it is 
operated without a winch cable in the jaw 
of the hook. 
The cure is, of course, to 
replace the mainspring. The other pivots 
and bolts should be examined for wear and 
security, but you are unlikely to run into 
much trouble here if the hook pivot is O.K. 
The hook pivot, and the link pivots, are 
the spots where wear always shows up first.
-14-

--- PAGE 22 ---