# 5. CONTROL SYSTEM AND CABLES, ETC

'J'HE control systems on nearly all gliders 
use cables. In many cases cables are 
used throughout, while in others we find 
push-pull rods and torque tubes in various 
places in the systems. We may well start 
this chapter, therefore, with a dissertation 
on cables.
The most widely used cable is 10-cwt. 
extra flexible cable. This consists of seven 
strands of nineteen wires in each strand. 
Eye-splices are made where the cable 
attaches to a turnbuckle or a fitting, though 
in some cases, notably Olympias, the turn- 
buckles and fittings are directly swaged into 
the cables. Previously we have discussed 
cable tensions, so we will not go any further 
into that subject, but will confine ourselves 
to the "ills that this steel coil is heir to".
Cables 
have 
three 
main 
enemies: 
corrosion, abrasion and fatigue. A corroded 
cable must be scrapped at once. 
The 
individual wires in the cable are very thin 
and any corrosion seriously weakens them. 
One of the best corrosion preventatives for 
cable is Lanolin Resin Solution D.T.D. 
297B. This is a yellow sticky paint which 
is applied to the cable. It never dries out 
hard, but remains faintly "rubbery". It can 
be removed again when required with a 
petrol-soaked rag. 
A worn or abraded 
cable also must be scrapped if any individual 
wires are broken. The places to look for this 
are fairleads, pulleys, and the openings in 
bulkheads and frames. Abrasion is rather 
more difficult to deal with, since obviously 
the cable must rub against something some- 
where. However, it will help if all rubbing 
places are kept clean and dry. This means 
not too much of the cable preservative at 
these spots and no lubrication whatever. 
Any attempt at lubrication merely results in 
the collection of grit particles, which then 
form a wonderful grinding compound with 
the grease or oil. This cuts the cable to 
pieces in no time. All fairleads and pulleys 
should be of fibre or plastic and no rubbing 
on unprotected wood or metal should be 
allowed.
The fatigue of cable is probably the most 
difficult problem to deal with. When a cable 
fatigues, the wires crack and break. The 
cause is always repeated bending round too 
small a radius, and manufacturers are often 
to blame for using too small a size of pulley
for the cable. Fatigue frays, in consequence, 
usually happen on the section of cable that 
runs over a pulley. If even only one wire has 
broken, the cable must be scrapped. This 
may seem drastic, but, if one wire has 
cracked, the others are all damaged to some 
extent and the cable cannot be trusted. Any 
rubbing place, such as a fairlead, is also a 
breeding ground for fatigue, since often an 
unsupported length of cable will vibrate in 
flight, and the fairlead is the place where 
bending due to the vibration occurs. There 
is no cure for fatigue other than to introduce 
modifications to the design to prevent it. 
All you can do is to inspect the cables 
frequently and, at the first sign of fatigue, 
scrap and replace the cable.
Splicing Cables
Sooner or later you are going to have to 
replace a cable, and this nearly always 
means that you will have to eye-splice the 
ends. Some machines, notably Olympias, 
have swaged ends to all the cables, and in 
this case you must buy a new cable from the 
makers unless you happen to have a 
swaging machine available. These machines 
are expensive gadgets and are unlikely to be 
found in the average gliding club.
Now splicing control cable is an art 
which is much best taught in a workshop 
by practical demonstration. However, for 
those who wish to teach themselves, here is 
how to go about it.
An eye-splice is always made round either 
a thimble or a bobbin. A thimble is a small 
metal lining to the eye, while a bobbin is a 
circular metal bush, usually intended to be 
fixed into the fitting or control horn by a 
clevis pin. 
The technique is exactly the 
same, though you will find that, since the 
bobbin is circular, it is rather more difficult 
to get the splice tight around it. See Figure 11.
Thimble
Bobbin
Fig. 11
Start by binding tightly round the cable a 
length of waxed thread. 
This binding
-15—

--- PAGE 23 ---
should be about J in. to | in. in length, and 
should be put on about 6 in. from the end 
of the cable. Its purpose is to allow the 
cable to be unravelled for 6 inches but no 
further. Now unravel the end of the cable. 
You will find that there are seven strands 
altogether six outer strands somewhat 
wavy, and a middle one which is quite 
straight. This latter strand we call the heart 
strand because it lies in the heart of the 
cable. Unravel down to the binding and 
splay out the six outer strands somewhat, 
leaving the heart strand sticking straight 
out of the middle. Now wrap the cable 
round the thimble so that the splayed ends, 
where they disappear into the binding, lie 
just at the jaw of the thimble. Mark the 
cable at the other jaw and put on a similar 
binding just inside the other jaw. Wrap the 
cable round the thimble again and lash 
round cable and thimble tightly with string 
to keep it in place while the splice is made. 
This lashing will later be removed when the 
splice is finished. The joint now should look 
like Figure 12, with three outer strands 
lying each side of the parent cable and the 
heart strand along the parent cable.
Now the principle of making the splice is 
to weave the six outer strands back into the
Heart
Spike
Fig. 12
parent cable, over and under each strand 
of it alternately, while the heart strand is 
pushed into the core to lie alongside the 
heart strand of the parent cable. Begin by 
pushing the spike into the cable at the point 
indicated and lift up one of the strands of 
the parent cable and push No. 1 strand 
through in the direction the spike went in. 
Remove the spike and pull No. 1 through 
tight. Pick up the next strand of the parent 
cable with the spike (the strand above as 
seen in the Figure) and do the same with 
No. 2 strand. 
Repeat the process with 
No. 3. Now slip the heart strand under 
No. 3 and push it down into the core of the
parent cable. 
Repeat the procedure of 
picking up the next parent cable strand 
and pass No. 4 under it. Do the same for 
No. 5 strand. Now, if we did the same for 
No. 6, it would have to go a long way round 
the parent cable before being spliced in. 
Therefore we adopt a different plan for this 
strand. It goes in the same place as No. 5, 
but passes under two strands of the parent 
cable. Pull all the strands down tight and 
you have done the first half-tuck of the splice.
Now inspect carefully. 
If you have 
worked correctly, there should be one 
strand coming out of each gap in the parent 
cable, and one only. 
Ignore the heart 
strand. Now, starting anywhere you like, 
take one strand, lead it over the next parent 
cable strand and put it under the next by 
using the spike. Follow round, doing the 
same with each strand in turn. When you 
come to the heart strand, simply ignore it. 
You only weave in the six outer strands 
into the parent cable, leaving the heart 
strand to lie inside the core of your splice 
against the heart strand of the parent cable. 
When you have done this over and under 
business with all six strands, you have 
completed one-and-a-half tucks. Pull down 
tight; inspect to see that one strand, and one 
only, emerges from each gap in the parent 
cable. After each tuck, after pulling tight it 
is a good plan to beat the splice gently with 
a mallet, or hide-faced hammer, on a piece 
of wood. This packs the splice down tight. 
Continue as above until you have a 
minimum of four-and-a-half tucks. When 
checking the number of tucks, select any 
strand, and, beginning at its loose end, 
follow it through the splice, counting as 
you go thus: under-over one, under-over 
two, under-over three, under-over four, 
under four-and-a-half. 
Cut off the loose 
ends of the strands, beat down and bind 
the finish of the splice with waxed linen 
thread. This binding should start at about 
the middle of the splice and finish on the 
unspliced parent cable. It must not cover 
more than half the splice, as this must be 
available for inspection. 
Remove the 
temporary lashing round the thimble and 
your splice is finished.
Now for some tips. A good splice is close, 
and tight, and it should be impossible to see 
daylight through it anywhere. To achieve 
this it helps if, each time a strand is threaded 
through, you take a little of the twist out of 
it. Also try to ensure that the spliced-in 
strands run round the parent cable with 
16 

--- PAGE 24 ---
approximately the same helix angle as the 
parent cable strands, but of course in the 
opposite direction. 
This means that the 
criss-cross effect is equi-angular, and the 
splice packs down tight properly. To stop 
the ends of the strands from unravelling 
when you are splicing, it is a good plan to 
twist the ends up with pliers. 
An even 
better scheme, if you have any acetylene 
welding gear handy, is to fuse the ends 
together by flashing them for a second in the 
blowpipe flame.
Splicing sounds quite easy. It is, when 
you know how. You will probably make 
several horrible wire birds'-nests in your 
first attempts, but don't be discouraged. It 
really is quite easy!
Hand splicing is rapidly being replaced by 
the system of swaged collars. These need a 
special machine to do the swaging, and the 
machine is expensive. However, the swaged 
splice is so neat, and can be done so quickly, 
that it has everything to recommend it.
Bearings and Hinges
Pulley bearings, stick, and torque tube 
bearings, may seem very simple things. 
Sometimes they are fitted with ball bearings, 
but more often they are plain bearings. 
Now, there is more than meets the eye in 
these bearings. 
They must be properly 
lubricated of course, but they must also be 
properly fitted and adjusted. In almost all 
of these bearings there is a replaceable 
element, whether it is a plain bush or a ball 
race. Figure 13 shows a cross section of a 
plain bearing in a pulley.
Bolt
Bush
Pulley H^^i \PulIey 
Fig. 13 
Bracket
The first thing to realise is that the pulley 
is meant to rotate on the bush. This means 
that the bush must be quite a free fit in the 
pulley and also it must be long enough to 
project slightly each side of the pulley, 
Then we can bolt up tightly to ensure that 
the bush is nipped between the sides of the
pulley bracket and can not rotate. If wear 
occurs, we can easily replace the bush or the 
pulley or both. There is, however, plenty of 
bearing area between the bush and pulley, 
and so wear will be slow.
Now consider what happens if lubrication 
is neglected and the bolt is not properly 
tightened. The pulley may seize up on the 
bush. The bush will then probably rotate on 
the bolt, provided that the nip is insufficient 
to hold the bush fixed. The bearing area 
between the bush and bolt is much smaller 
and wear will be rapid. Worse still, the 
pulley, bush and bolt may seize solid and 
the whole issue rotate in the bracket. In 
these circumstances the bearing area is 
almost nil, being merely the thickness of 
plates of the pulley brackets multiplied by 
the diameter of the bolt. 
Wear will be 
extremely rapid and the holes in the 
brackets will wear elongated and the 
bracket and bolt will have to be scrapped.
The above applies equally to stick 
bearings. Where ball races are fitted, the 
same basic rules apply. The inner element 
must be firmly fixed in the bracket and the 
outer element must be properly attached to 
the rotating member, pulley, stick or what- 
ever it may be. The usual way of doing this 
is to make the outer race a press fit in the 
rotating member, and to hold the inner 
race by gripping it endwise exactly like the 
plain bush in the above example.
Control surface hinges should be care- 
fully watched for wear. 
Cleanliness and 
proper lubrication will delay wear in these 
parts, but when they do become worn they 
are very simple and cheap to replace with 
new items. It is usually a waste of time to 
ream and fit over-size pins. One point is 
very important. This is that at least one 
side of the hinge must be positively pre- 
vented from twisting round on its bolt in 
the spar. If this were to happen, so that an 
elevator hinge, for example, were to twist so 
that the axis of the hinge pin became 
vertical instead of horizontal, the control 
surface would lock solid. This would be 
unfunny in the extreme. The usual way of 
securing the hinge against rotation is to fit 
two small wood-screws through a plate 
which is attached under the head of the 
forked eyebolt. 
These screws are driven 
into the spar, and the hinge cannot then 
turn in the spar without shearing these 
screws. In consequence, these screws are 
very important items and must never be 
omitted.
-17-

--- PAGE 25 ---