# 6. FABRIC AND DOPE

]y/[osj gliders have much of their wing, 
tail and control surfaces covered with 
fabric. 
The fabric contributes nothing 
to the strength of the structure, but it is very 
important nevertheless, because it main- 
tains the aerodynamic shape of the glider. 
On wings, etc., it transfers the lifting forces 
to the ribs, which in turn transfer them to the 
spars and thus to the fuselage. The strength 
of the fabric is therefore important, since, 
if it should rip or split in the air, it would 
spoil the efficiency of the aerofoil and might 
even lead to loss of control.
Fabric is sometimes used to cover ply- 
wood surfaces. In these cases the fabric is 
purely and simply a protective covering and 
a vehicle, or filler, for the dope or paint.
For wings and other flying surfaces two 
types of fabric are commonly used. The 
first is Madapolam, which is a cotton fabric. 
It is very light, and takes dope very well 
though it is rather liable to rot in bad 
conditions. The second type is a cotton 
fabric such as D.T.D. 275. This is some- 
what heavier than Madapolam, but seems 
to resist rot considerably better. It usually 
outlasts Madapolam by a very big margin, 
provided that it is properly doped. It is 
also stronger. 
For covering plywood 
surfaces Madapolam is used, since strength 
does not matter, and the fabric is lighter.
Before we discuss repairs and re-covering 
of components, we must first clear up a few 
points about dopes.
Dopes are not paints, though some 
cellulose paints look and smell very like 
dopes. The purpose of doping fabric is to 
tighten it, make it water and air proof, thus 
preventing rot, make it opaque to prevent 
deterioration from ultra-violet light, and to 
give it a good smooth aerodynamic finish. 
We are not concerned here with the 
chemical composition of dopes, but it may 
be as well to note that different makes of 
dope do differ in composition and fre- 
quently will not agree. If you redope a piece 
of fabric with a dope different from the 
original, you may find that "pickling" or 
blistering occurs. For this reason, keep to 
one make of dope throughout for each job.
All dope manufacturers publish Doping 
Schemes, and fabric should always be doped 
in accordance with an approved Doping 
Scheme. A typical scheme for a wing might
be: Two stick-down coats of clear to attach 
the fabric to the timber, 3 or 4 coats of red 
tautening dope to tauten the fabric, build it 
up and fill the "grain" of the fibres: one or 
two coats aluminium dope, tautening or 
non-tautening, to make the surface opaque, 
followed by two coats of finishing colour, 
non-tautening, to produce the final high- 
gloss polished surface. The doping scheme 
used should always be quoted in the log 
book. This enables repairs to be made with 
the same scheme and thus eliminate the 
danger of using the wrong dopes with all the 
infuriating results, pickling etc.
Doping should be done in a warm, dry 
place, well ventilated. The first coat must 
be brushed on to get proper penetration of 
the fabric. 
Subsequent coats may be 
sprayed. Be careful not to inhale too much 
of the vapour. A mask is useful here and 
should be used when spraying. Drink some 
milk, the more the better, after doping, as 
this will neutralise any of the effects of the 
vapour. If you don't, you may find yourself 
with a lovely headache.
If the doping room is cold and damp, you 
may find a "bloom" forming on the doped 
fabric. This is a maddening trouble, and, 
while you can mitigate it somewhat by 
using Anti-Chill Thinners for the dope, 
there is no cure. You must stop and wait for 
warmer conditions, or stoke up the stove.
Lastly, do remember that dope is terribly 
inflammable. Carelessness in smoking, etc. 
can result in a beautiful bang, followed by a 
glorious bonfire! The doping of gliders and 
aeroplanes is virtually the same thing. The 
only real difference is that the degree of 
tautness aimed at in glider work is some- 
what less, otherwise there is a danger of 
distorting trailing edges, etc. When it comes 
to fabric work, however, there are quite a 
few differences. On gliders no sewing of 
fabric, patches, tears, etc. is necessary. The 
low wing loading permits us to stick the 
fabric down onto the structure with dope 
alone. 
Similarly, no stringing of ribs is 
needed, unless the underside of the wing is 
very deeply cambered, when the fabric is 
sometimes stitched to the bottom booms of 
the ribs. Even this can often be avoided by 
loading the fabric down onto the ribs with 
books, magazines, etc., and carefully doping 
it onto the ribs. This dope is allowed to dry 
18 

--- PAGE 26 ---
before unloading the fabric. All these points 
make fabric work on gliders far easier 
than on powered aircraft.
The most usual job in fabric work is to 
repair a hole, or tear, in a wing. When you 
are satisfied that there is no damage to the 
internal structure, or that any repairs to it 
have been satisfactorily completed, proceed 
as follows: remove all spanners, screw- 
drivers, bolts and nuts, etc. that have been 
left inside the wing, tear away the damaged 
fabric to a rectangular hole, and prepare a 
piece of fabric which will cover this hole 
with about an inch overlap for holes up to 
4in. x 4in. or two-inch overlap for longer 
patches. This patch must be of the same 
material as the wing fabric. With tautening 
dope, clear, and a brush, apply a coat of 
dope to one edge of the hole and dope down 
one edge of the patch, taking care that the 
overlap is correct. Allow this dope to dry, 
and then repeat the procedure along an 
adjacent edge. The other two edges can 
then be similarly treated and allowed to dry. 
The patch should then be redoped around 
the edges and allowed to dry again. The 
idea is to get all edges firmly doped down 
and stuck before doping the middle of the 
patch. The undoped middle portion should 
now look nicely taut and smooth, and you 
can stroke in the first coat of dope with the 
brush evenly all over it. This will nearly 
break your heart because the patch will now 
look a horrid, saggy mess. Fear not: press 
on with the doping scheme, allowing each 
coat to dry before the next is applied. You 
may have to apply a coat or two more, or 
less, than called for in the doping scheme. 
The aim is to get the patch to the same 
tension as the main fabric, and "built up" 
or "filled in" until it has the same texture. 
Use tautening, or non-tautening, dope, 
depending on whether tautness, or filling in, 
is required. Finish with the colour scheme. 
A high gloss can be obtained by rubbing 
over the patch with a rag moistened with 
dope thinners. 
Remember that doped 
fabric will go on tautening very slowly for a 
day or so after doping. Properly applied, a 
patch can be made almost invisible. It will 
help to this end if the patch can be cut v/ith 
pinking shears, or if these are not available, 
the patch should have its edges frayed for 
about |in. all round.
Covering a main component, such as a 
wing, is basically the same process. The 
structure should first have two good coats of 
clear tautening dope applied all over where
the fabric is to stick. Dope down the fabric 
on a long edge first and allow to dry. Now 
stretch the fabric over the whole surface and 
fix it in place. Drawing pins are very useful 
here. When you have it tight and smooth 
all over, dope all round the edges and along 
each rib to stick the fabric into place. Trim 
edges, redope all round again and over ribs, 
etc. and allow to dry. The edge should be 
lapped round the trailing edge and similar 
places. Now turn the wing over and repeat 
the procedure on the other side. You can 
then go ahead according to your approved 
doping scheme. 
All laps round trailing 
edges, etc. should be covered with a 2 in. 
strip of fabric with frayed or pinked edges. 
Tips to bear in mind: do make sure that all 
traces of old fabric are removed. If the old 
fabric was very rotten, this can be quite a 
long job, as it tends to stick to ribs, etc. and 
may have to be sanded off. If the old fabric 
was not too bad, it may tear off the ribs 
and trailing edges, etc. in strips, so don't let 
the fabric get too bad before you decide to 
re-cover. Do ensure your new fabric is really 
dry before you start. It is a good plan to 
put it out in the sun (if any) for an hour, 
while you are getting things ready, to allow 
it to air thoroughly. When brushing in the 
first coats of dope, don't press heavily but 
stroke the dope in with gentle, even strokes. 
Heavy pressure tends to stretch the fabric 
and makes the tautening process rather 
uneven. Each subsequent coat of dope will 
appear to relax the tension when applied, 
but don't worry about this as the tension 
will reappear again, tighter than before, as 
the coat dries off.
Applying fabric to ply-covered surfaces is 
a little different. Dope all over the ply first 
and allow to dry. Now stretch the fabric as 
tightly as possible over the fuselage, or 
whatever it is that you are covering and 
brush in the dope, following up with a 
rubbing pad of fabric to rub the dope 
through the fabric on to the ply. 
Use 
drawing pins if necessary and do the above 
jobs with clear tautening dope. 
Most 
manufacturers 
have 
approved 
doping 
schemes for ply-covered surfaces and one of 
these should be followed. All joins in the 
fabric should be trimmed to edge-to-edge 
butt joints and then covered with 2-in. 
frayed edge, or pinked strip. 
Once the 
fabric has been properly "filled in", the 
surface can be worked up to a really high- 
gloss finish. You can get liquid filler dopes 
which make the filling-in process much 
19—

--- PAGE 27 ---
quicker. 
This process does give a mag- 
nificent protective covering to the plywood 
of a fuselage and it must also add a little to 
the strength. It is true that it is a little 
heavier than ordinary paint, but the lovely 
finish is a joy to behold.
Tips to remember when doping: 
Make sure that the initial "stick down" 
coats of clear dope really do stick. This is 
greatly helped if you rub the dope in with a 
small pad of fabric over all ribs, ply 
surfaces, etc. so that it is properly squeezed 
through the fabric onto the wood below. 
This also eliminates air bubbles under the 
fabric.
The first coats on a patch or a newly 
covered component may feel a little rough 
to the touch. If so, touch them down with 
a fine abrasive paper. This will make a vast 
difference to the final finish.
Brushes get into a horrid state if they are 
not properly cleaned in thinners. A very
f
ood plan is to keep brushes in one of those 
ig sweet jars that confectioners use. Put a 
few inches of thinners in the bottom and 
drop the brushes in. They will stay soft and
in good condition, and the thinners will not 
evaporate provided you keep the lid 
screwed down tight. As these jars are of 
glass, you can see at a glance where the 
particular brush you want is hiding.
Perspex canopies sometimes develop 
cracks through mishandling or damage. To 
stop cracks from spreading, drill a small 
hole, about  & in. or so, at the extreme end 
of the crack. A patch should then be made 
and stuck over the crack, using one of the 
many proprietary brands of perspex cement. 
While on this subject, it might be as well to 
point out that you may come across 
canopies which are not made of perspex at 
all. There are now a variety of transparent 
plastics, and if in doubt, it is always worth 
while to refer to the manufacturers for 
advice. Any patches should of course have 
their edges chamfered down, and it is neater 
to fit them inside the canopy if this is 
possible.
A good perspex cement can be made up 
by dissolving some perspex chips in chloro- 
form, or glacial acetic acid.
Yorkshire
Gliding Club
SUTTON BANK • THIRSK
Full facilities for the repairs 
and maintenance of Club 
and Private owner Sail­ 
planes.
Write to the 
Secretary for quotations
JOHN HULME
MOTOR BODY BUILDER 
RATHMORE ROAD, CAMBRIDGE 
B.G.A. APPROVED INSPECTOR
Phone: CAMBRIDGE 87862
For all repairs, overalls, 
C of A's and materials. 
Trailers built to order. 
A'C Bought and Sold.
—3D-

--- PAGE 28 ---