 bunkhouse had gone to 
sleep. Jane, however, could not; she could hear the wind whining 
round the big wooden hut, and the windsock flapping and cracking 
outside. There was certainly enough wind, if only it would veer 
west. She dozed off under her heap of nine blankets, then wakened 
with a start and sat up in bed. It was still dark outside, and her 
watch showed just after five o'clock. She lay back, listening. There 
was still plenty of wind battering against the walls, but somehow 
it seemed to have changed its note; had it veered—enough ? 
She 
climbed out of bed, treading on the icy floor, and tried to see the 
windsock, but it was just out of sight round the corner. She crept 
back and lay listening to the wind, then dozed off for another hour. 
Another start as she woke up, it was still almost dark, but the low 
clouds tearing across the sky showed rifts and patches of gloomy 
light. Jane lay on her back, rubbing her eyes in an endeavour to 
stay awake, not daring even to relax in case, when she awoke next, 
it would be to the sound of the breakfast bell.
Slowly, from the grey depths outside, trailers, like gaunt monsters, 
became visible against the lightening sky, growing larger and blacker 
as the minutes dragged on.
At quarter to seven Jane got out of bed. Pulling a pair of bor­ 
rowed sheepskin flying boots on to her bare feet, and a big coat 
over her pyjamas, she went to the door to see where the wind 
really was. Turning the handle as silently as possible, nothing 
happened—it was loose in her hand. They had forgotten to tell
47

--- PAGE 61 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
the last in not to latch the door as the handle had broken on the 
inside! She would have to get out by the window. Unfortunately 
the lower half was not meant to open and there was only a small 
gap eight feet from the ground. She reached for a chair and 
inspected the upper catch, which seemed to be caught up with the 
curtain wire. It made a loud twang as she freed it, but the slum- 
berers remained undisturbed. Carefully she opened the upper 
window and got one leg through, sitting astride the sill. Trans­ 
ferring her weight to the window, the chair fell over with a crash. 
She held her breath, but it woke up only one person, another Jane.
" What's the time ? " she whispered loudly.
" Seven o'clock. I'm just going to see where the wind is. 
Some 
poop's latched the door and I can't get out."
" If it's west, I'll come and help you."
" Thanks," said Jane, disappearing on to the top of a trailer. 
She jumped to the ground, slithering in the mud and snow round 
to the end of the hut.
The windsock was flying out and bucking about in the gusts, and 
it was west, blowing hard towards the hill.
Jane skated around with excitement and dashed back to the 
bunkhouse; opening the door from the outside was easy, and she 
found the other Jane nearly dressed.
" It's west," she said hoarsely. Then she went across to her 
brother's room, tapping quietly on the door. There was no reply, 
so she crept in, to see rows of beds with heaps of blankets on them, 
queer, shapeless masses with no heads. At last she found one whose 
head was just showing; it was Brown, so she pulled his ear and 
whispered, " The wind's west. Where's Bill ? He promised to 
launch me."
Brown pointed to a heap of blankets on the other side of the room., 
Bill's broad shoulders showing unmistakably.

--- PAGE 62 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
" I'll come and flag for you/ 5 Brown whispered as she tip-toed 
across the room.
Bill grunted and turned over, then sat up just as abruptly and 
stared at her, eyes blinking as he worked things out.
" It's west," she said.
" O.K., I'll be out in a few minutes."
" Thanks; I'll go and get the hangar doors open."
She crept out, to find the other Jane dressed and ready. It was 
bitterly cold, and the hill and landing-field were covered with a 
thin layer of snow. The sky was grey-white, with low, racing 
clouds. The air and ridge seemed to merge as one.
They pushed open the hangar doors and started up one of the 
retrieving cars, by which time Bill, Brown, Michael Peters, her 
brother, and two others had come to help them, trousers, sweaters, 
and coats pulled on over their pyjamas. Jane felt very gratified 
that all these people should have got up so willingly after such a 
late night, just to help her do something that she wanted.
While Bill and Michael got out the winch and Brown inspected 
the Grunau as airworthy, Jane went back and put on all the clothes 
she could find over her pyjamas; then with two large scarves and 
an extra overcoat, she collected some sandwiches and a large raw 
carrot. 
She liked raw carrots, and had brought a big bunch to the 
tramps' party for fun, and had just one left.
By the time that she was ready,, the winch was set and the cable 
had been laid out across the ground.
" You ride on the car; I'll take the wing tip," said Brian. So 
Jane stood on the running board of the old retrieving car as they 
chugged across the snow-covered ground. She was busy sorting 
out her pockets, putting sandwiches and the carrot in one, and her 
handkerchief and gloves in the other.
She was feeling a bit sick with excitement, and everything seemed
49

--- PAGE 63 ---
cc
(C
SILENT FLIGHT
like a dream. Having longed for this moment, the first part of her 
Silver C, for so long, now that it had come, she did not want to do 
it a bit. But when she heard Brian's voice telling her to get in 
before he turned the Grunau into wind, she automatically did so, 
doing up the straps less tightly than usual, so that she could move 
when she got tired. Mike fitted on the transparent cockpit cover 
and wished her luck; Brian put his hand through the circular air­ 
hole in the lid and pulled her hair.
I wish I had thought of this first," he said with a grin. 
I'm going to give one flag," shouted Mike.
Jane hooked her finger in the release ring and got ready for the 
launch; it would only be her second winch launch, and still required 
a certain amount of thought and attention. The cable rustled up 
taut, and the release clicked as it straightened up. The familiar 
cloud of blue haze surrounded the distant winch. The Grunau 
started the usual gentle rocking.
Michael gave two flags, and the machine moved forward; as the 
skid left the ground, Jane pulled the stick hard back, and gripped 
the release ring tightly. She was climbing very steeply, and the 
machine started to buck up and down as the cable swung and jerked; 
easing the stick gently forward to stop it, she intently watched the 
winch, and as it got farther underneath her, she eased the nose 
down a little more and got ready to pull the plug. She waited, 
then tugged at the ring. The machine bobbed up a little as the 
weight of the cable fell away, but soon settled into a normal glide 
as she turned towards the hill.
She had not flown a machine with a transparent lid before, and 
found it much easier than she expected, in spite of the fact that it 
created a habit of flying on the airspeed indicator, instead of by 
the feel of the machine.
It was a mournful scene that surrounded her as she beat up and
50

--- PAGE 64 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
down the ridge, several hundred feet high. The earth was snow­ 
bound and grey, deepening to the hard sombre line of the horizon. 
Above, the sky was grey, with fragments of darker cloud torn by 
the wind racing along a hundred feet above her head. The 
chimneys of the village away to the north gave evidence of Sunday- 
morning breakfast-time, as more and more belched smoke, which 
became invisible as it rose above the horizon into the grey sky. 
Occasionally the tinkle of distant church bells rode past on the 
wind.
Jane looked down on the landing-field, searching for the others, 
but the ground was empty, and the winch stood forlornly by the 
hedge; their tracks to the launching-point showed clearly, also the 
disturbance caused by the falling winch cable. She flew up and 
down, venturing right along the ridge over the power cable slope 
to the zoo, two miles away.
Arriving back over the home ridge, she saw five little dots dragging 
something behind them, moving towards the hill; slowly they pulled 
it to the top—a toboggan made from old skids and bits of broken 
sailplane. The five clambered on and, pointing straight at the 
bottom, the overcrowded sledge whistled down the steep slope. 
Near the bottom it hit a bump and the five little dots flew off in all 
directions; Jane laughed loudly to herself and watched them examine 
the remains of the toboggan.
The first hour went quite quickly, then another Grunau, with 
Bill piloting, was launched and sailed past. Bill waved, then 
flew out over the clubhouse and threw a couple of loops. The 
two-seater also came up and flew around, while the passenger 
shouted something which Jane could not hear.
The second hour was a bit monotonous and the seat beginning 
to feel hard, so, for something to do, Jane sang at the top of her 
voice everything she knew from the " Merry-Go-Round Broke
51

--- PAGE 65 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
Down " to " Abide With Me." She also whistled a few tunes, but 
found that it steamed up the inside of the celluloid roof.
The snow was slowly melting, and the patches of dirty grey-green 
destroyed the smoothness of the landscape. Somebody landed a 
Kite on the top of a slight slope, and slid very, very slowly all the 
way to the bottom without being able to stop, the skid acting as a 
very efficient ski; again Jane laughed loudly.
Her right hand was getting stiff, so she opened it from the 
clenched position, but found that it had got so set, that if she spread 
her fingers out they would not go back to the holding position for 
some time; so she just had to leave them gripping the stick, un­ 
comfortable as they were.
During the third hour the watch on the dashboard seemed to 
move slower and slower, and Jane was getting very bored, the seat 
extremely hard, and she had to move about every three or four 
minutes to avoid getting cramp. There were several machines 
flying around by this time, and Jane watched with a mixture of 
amusement and sympathy the excited efforts of the Nacelle dashing 
up and down beneath her, as newer pilots tried to get their C's. 
She also amused herself by trying to recognise members' cars as 
they turned up at the club.
The fourth hour was the worst of the lot. The seat grew harder 
and sharper, her feet got colder and colder, and her hand more and 
more stiff. 
She tried flying with her left hand, but merely wallowed 
about the sky; and the feeling of complete boredom was awful, so 
she started yodelling as loudly as possible to relieve her feelings.
The wind remained westerly and strong, but was accompanied 
by several showers of sleet, which made flying interesting, if a trifle 
unpleasant. Jane didn't feel at all hungry, but nibbled the carrot 
and sandwiches just for something to do.
At long last the clock passed the midday and four-hour mark,
52

--- PAGE 66 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
and all at once everything seemed easier. It would not be long now.
The wind had strengthened, so it was possible just to face into 
it and remain poised, several hundred feet in the air. There was 
also lift out over the landing-field as far as the clubhouse, and it 
was fun to fly fast into wind until above the hangar, then pulling 
the nose up a little, so that the airspeed of the sailplane was just 
less than that of the wind, float gently backwards until once more 
above the hill.
Jane spent some time flying about in this manner, and suddenly 
found that the five hours were up, it was just one o'clock; she shouted 
with joy, and shot up the hill-top launching point, flying along the 
ridge for another five minutes just to make certain of the time; 
then out over the road for the approach in. It had been sleeting 
quite hard for the last ten minutes, and the front of the cockpit 
cover was covered with slush and snow. Jane was so pleased at 
having completed the five hours that she did not take much trouble 
over the approach and came in too high; she threw a circle to lose 
height, and then found that she was too low to turn into wind, 
so had to make a cross-wind landing, and as the snow blocked out 
her view ahead, she made this manoeuvre three feet up. There was 
a loud bump, followed by a series of small bumps, which felt very 
hard through the seat; bits of dust shot up from the floor, and the 
watch fell off its hook on the dashboard.
Jane did not get out at once; she knew that the skid was broken, 
and was feeling very much annoyed with herself for being so careless. 
If she had taken a certain amount of trouble over the approach, 
instead of being so pleased with herself, she need not have broken 
anything; but on the whole, she was rather glad that she had—it 
would certainly prevent her getting a swelled head.
A car bounced across the ground, its two occupants, Brian and 
Mike, bobbing up and down like the pips in a variometer. Jane
53

--- PAGE 67 ---
cc 
cc
SILENT FLIGHT
got out and leaned against the nose, stretching the stiffness out of 
her right hand.
Jolly good show," they shouted. 
I've broken the skid," she answered.
They carried the machine into the hangar, underneath the room 
where everyone was having lunch. They all congratulated her, 
and did not seem to notice the skid or the landing; even the people 
who were next on the list, and who would now lose their flights, 
congratulated her. It had been rather fun, and made her realise 
what good friends she had at the club.
But it was only several months later that she found out that the 
instructor had wanted to call her down, as there were so many 
people waiting to fly, but that the other Jane had threatened never 
to speak to him again if he did!
54

--- PAGE 68 ---
CHAPTER VIII
The First Departure
JjY the Easter holidays Wooders had finished the Hi7. Jane had 
built the tailplane entirely on her own; Brian had fitted up the 
control assembly, made the seat and mounted the instruments; 
and they had built the rudder between them. Wooders had done 
all the rest while they had been at school.
The trailer was not yet finished, but Bill had come over to take 
the machine to the hangar for them, in exchange for which they 
gave him another good meal. It was almost impossible to keep 
equal with Bill—he was always helping people; retrieving, launching, 
or crewing somehow; and yet he still found time to be one of the 
best pilots in the club.
They had the machine ready for the start of the Easter advanced 
camp, spending the first few days test-flying it. This was done by 
giving the machine a weak, then a strong, bungy launch from the 
primary slopes where they had started. Then taking it to the top 
of the hill for another launch and about twenty minutes' soaring. 
If there was any adjustment to be made, or anything wrong with 
the machine, it would become apparent on the ground hops, only 
ten feet up, where the pilot was in a comparatively safe position. 
After the hill soaring test, it might be necessary to tighten the control 
wires slightly, giving the ailerons, for instance, a half-inch droop 
below the wing while on the ground, so that the airflow would 
bring them up flush with the wing while in flight, which gave 
better control. 
When it had been flown to the pilot's satisfaction, the machine
55

--- PAGE 69 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
would be given a winch launch, after which it would be ready for 
any further flying.
Two days after the twins and Bill had test-flown it, Brian tried 
for his five hours. As he would fly their own machine, it was not 
necessary to start as early as Jane had, which was unfortunate, 
because then it would have been easy.
He was launched at 2.30 in the afternoon into a strong westerly 
wind, and a blue sky with scattered cumuli; three hours later all 
strong thermal conditions had ended and the sky was clear. Brian 
was enjoying himself—it had been rather fun throwing a tentative 
circle or two in the strong lift of the early afternoon, and now the 
air was smooth as cream, and it was possible to fly a whole beat 
without moving the controls at all, in peace and quiet.
At 6.30, four hours after the start, Brian found himself quite a lot 
lower than he had been previously; then he saw the Kadet go to 
the bottom, unable to soar; and began to get rather worried; the 
wind was slowly dying. Would it last long enough for that fifth 
important hour ? With thirty minutes to go, he was down to fifty 
feet above the hill-top. Ten minutes later the Hi7 was making its 
turns inside the bowl, below the top. Jane was watching this last 
half-hour in a frenzy of concentration. Not once did she cease 
gazing at the little sailplane as it flew up and down, struggling to 
keep in the air. Others were watching too, others who had 
been let down by the same fickle wind, almost with their goal in 
sight.
Suddenly the breeze freshened, and the machine once more rose 
above the towering ridge. Jane relaxed; she knew how awful it 
would have been if she had been let down; she would have screamed 
with disappointment and the knowledge that she would have to do 
the same boring business all over again. Ten more minutes to go, and 
Brian was still just holding it, flying with all the knowledge and
56

--- PAGE 70 ---
v'<V
£»'
.. :^?^4^^S^---• • ^^" 
,.,,, 
,,.-,,„-'• •••••-*•
,*tf*»?#v "' 
• >^';: •":':""'••••': -'•'•"-/:
^|^^|^^^^^^'ftSf?*?f*^(S!®*'^
|J .j;>' ; . 1 "0''-'"'f 1
'"",','</ •.•'.','. 
• ' '\ ' -''.'•'^tSit^'^B^"*^"1'
^^•^^^^^j^it
.,^,,; ~ 
^v^^,;.,__.
^m¥«^«, : .-•:::• ^-:;^3S^^, ,,^T.'', 
yAffr 
., ,:,:„,,, ^^^^^,^;i-:^^''
* \i* ft 
..--••. 
' .^ v;^^^, ;^:;,-, :^^^,,.. v , : , 
.
-y^^^' 
..: 
: 
, 
... 
• 
.....,- ^^•••^-^ : ;,v^;^;_---
.-•:• ." 
•• 
- 
"" 
•.••<••<•'•" -,' ,';•,•''. , 'Vrt'/.iS'^ayV-j 
•'«*-^',"'1rVc..'»•, 
^"•W^"'. - '' 
ff' '^i*^ f- •'•••',".'••'' 
..',"'"":• 'U^.;'''"?^' X'^J^^-':^^'-^^ ' 
'"1A.V .''•
.>•'.'<'y^i' ,-?/V'-:(,i | ' pi'ij iV^ ^ • •" . 
; . 
•,.';",'•''.. ',•''•'''•','•"- 
'''•''•'. i ''.'''•''''• 
'••'•';'/' ''' 1'-. .••!.'.' 
' ''^j'"t--> •"••'•:
I •%. "^
** * 
'vTv.'*
-.;j«*i<'^&*-
"^'.•rtV* 
';'•• 
' '"•• : !fi
•.-o'-^^gtefe
She found lift, and was able to circle as well

--- PAGE 71 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
care that he could muster; but the wind was dying; it could not 
last. His friends all had watches out, willing the wind to remain, 
for it was going to be a very near thing.
The Hi7 was sinking, flying well below the top; it turned down 
towards the bowl, light against the dark of the sunburned grass, 
and it turned again with just enough height to scuttle back to the 
club grounds and sit down on top of the linches just beside the actual 
landing area. Brian had been in the air four hours and fifty-six 
minutes, but there was nothing that he could have done about it, 
so when they came to fetch him in and wish him better luck next 
time, he smiled and just said that he would still get his Silver 
before Jane.
The next day the wind blew again from the west, but it was 
Jane's day to fly. 
She was launched about eleven o'clock in the 
morning, just as the early ragged clouds were growing into good 
cumulus, with fluffy, rounded tops and dark, flat bases. 
By half-past 
twelve the clouds were tending to street formation, forming into 
long lines across the sky. Two machines had already gone away, 
and Jane very much wanted to follow their example, and was 
carefully waiting for her chance, when she saw a Kite start rising 
rapidly over the Bastion; she flew down to get in the same patch 
of lift, and arrived just as the Kite started circling 300 feet above 
her. She found the lift, however, and after a short time was able 
to circle as well; she lost no height over the first one, so threw 
another, which also worked, and gave her enough height to enable 
her to cease worrying about being too low behind the hill, although 
she knew that it would be practically impossible to fly back to the 
site against the wind if she continued much farther; but Jane did 
not mind that—she did not want to go back, she wanted to fly 
across the country like the other pilots, like the machine whose 
thermal she had borrowed.
E 
57

--- PAGE 72 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
The Kirby Kite above her was very high, and had left the lift 
to fly cross-wind to a likely cloud street. Jane, however, clung to 
the lift she had and knew was certain, circling frantically. It was 
her first thermal, and she was determined not to lose it. At nearly 
2,000 feet it began to get very rough, having the effect of suddenly 
stopping the turn, and leaving the machine on its side. Jane 
managed to hang on the lift until the altimeter read 2,600 feet, 
where she found that she was circling half in and half out of the 
thermal. In trying to get back to the centre, she lost it altogether, 
finding herself in a four-foot-per-second downdraught instead. 
She had not reached cloudbase, but was higher than she had ever 
been before, and found it a very pleasant sensation.
Pointing the nose downwind, she tried to get as far as she could 
from the hill in case she did not get any more lift. It was only when 
she was down to 400 feet above the ground that she eventually 
gave up hope—all the prospective crops and villages just would not 
help. She saw a good field, so flew round it to get a better look; 
it seemed to be smooth enough and had quite good approaches. 
Jane floated in between the oak trees at the end and sat down in 
the middle.
The Hi7 had hardly come to rest before crowds of onlookers 
rushed up and surrounded her; some stood silent, just looking, 
others asked her questions, while a few started examining the 
machine. She got out and turned the tip into wind, feeling like 
Bill must have felt when he landed in their field; then asked for a 
telephone.
Soon Brian and Bradwell arrived to fetch her, and almost before 
she had realised that she had really made a cross-country flight by 
sailplane, Jane was back at the club, with the usual scenery and the 
usual people.
She had only flown a distance of six miles, which had taken about
58

--- PAGE 73 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
twenty minutes, but every second was stamped on her memory as 
the most thrilling episode of her life.
The camp passed happily enough, but the weather was not as 
good as that of the previous summer's camp: for three days after 
Jane's flight it rained; then the wind blew unceasingly from the 
south-east, down the hill. Members staying at the club spent their 
time in wax-polishing their machines and fitting or refitting their 
instruments, and talking or wandering out to look at the windsock.
The last two days, however, were all that could be wished for. 
A depression, which had been forecast two days before, was crossing 
the British Isles; and the cold front which brought cloud and rain 
had passed, and Branchester was in the cold sector of polar air in 
the rear of the depression. The wind blew from the west-north­ 
west, bringing cumulus which formed long streets right across the 
sky.
Jack's Adler and a new high-performance machine which had 
just been brought over from Germany, called the Minhnoa, had 
already gone away. Bill was feverishly putting a new landing skid 
on the white Kite, the result of a slight argument with a sandbag 
that someone had left in the grass, so that he could fly before con­ 
ditions deteriorated.
Brian was dashing up and down the ridge, wondering just how 
he would cope with a thermal at that height if he was lucky enough 
to get one; he was lower than nearly everything else, through 
flying faster than necessary, for fear of stalling while so near the 
ground. But he got into a thermal, and, not realising what it was, 
thought that something had gone wrong with the machine when 
it started bucking about: he could feel a sudden pressure under his 
seat and the whole air seemed to sizzle around him, but lack of 
experience told, and he flew right through it without taking his 
opportunity; and only when he flew out of the back of it, and stood
59

--- PAGE 74 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
on his nose when the air became flat again, did he recognise what 
it had been. Turning quickly, he flew back along the beat, but 
the thermal had gone, and with it the Rhonsperber, and the Petrel, 
a new efficient sailplane of British design; Brian glared at them 
furiously as they circled far above him.
Bill had told him that thermals usually had a frequency of ten 
to twelve minutes, so he noted the time, determined to be near the 
Bastion when the next thermal took off. He flew up and down in 
the simple hill lift where the thermal had been such a short time 
ago; the air was quite smooth again and seemed incapable of 
providing such power. Ten minutes dragged by, then twelve—he 
had missed his chance; he flew another beat for luck—nothing. 
He turned away and flew down towards the zoo; maybe the air 
would be kinder to him there. Over the pit of splashing Polar bears 
he banked round again to beat back, just in time to see the Nacelle 
at 600 feet on a C flight! Shouting with annoyance, he pushed the 
nose down and dashed back to the Bastion as fast as possible. Three 
machines were rising rapidly; the thermal off the chalk slopes and 
the clubhouse had come again, late. As Brian flew into the lift, the 
now familiar symptoms made themselves apparent—the rocky feeling 
of the machine, and the increased reading of the airspeed indicator; 
he was rising fast, and soon had enough height to throw a circle; 
the variometer still showed rise, so he still continued to circle; he 
took a quick glance at the hill, which seemed to have shrunk to 
miniature proportions. The altimeter was reading 1,800 feet and 
the variometer still showed on the credit side; Brian gripped the 
edge of the dashboard tightly with his left hand in excitement, 
licking his lips incessantly, as his mouth felt dry. This was terrific, 
the greatest moment of his life. 
He looked again at the club far 
behind; he had definitely burnt his boats, he could never go back 
now; he looked ahead at the towns and fields spreading across the 
60

--- PAGE 75 ---
" 
' 
A:-':;^^H££^:i'*7^^ 
••;«.• 
^jtggSi'^•''•".'•:• '''"•£
. v^^^^-;;^,::;^^;^^^ ' 
^ £S^ :*^-^sg^^?,*-, ^ :
^---•*y*±*i*.
turned away and flew towards the Zoo

--- PAGE 76 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
inland; it would be in one of those fields that he would land. This 
was the moment that he had been waiting for since his first ground 
hop.
Another machine had got away with him, and was slowly out- 
climbing him on the outside. The same as Bill's machine, it was 
painted pale grey, being universally known as the Grey Kite, 
spending more time in the air than probably any other machine in 
the club. Brian waved to its pilot, whose sunburnt face was just 
visible above the cockpit fairing. He shouted something back, but 
Brian was too intent on flying the Hi7 in the rougher air near the 
clouds to notice. The grey Kite was now above him and very 
near cloud base, occasionally disappearing into the lower wispy 
vapour, the presence of which marks an active cloud from a dead one.
The cloud above them was one of a long street which stretched 
across the sky, its purple shadow on the ground denoting it to be 
almost fifteen miles in length.
The grey Kite circled a few times under the big cloud above 
them, then turned downwind and flew away fast under the street, 
his speed over the ground being in the region of eighty miles per 
hour, as he could afford to dive slightly with the strong lift continually 
drawing him up towards the clouds. Brian imitated his actions 
absolutely, and soon found himself sailing downwind under the 
powerful street; at last he was really away, and the grey Kite a 
mere dot in the distance. He could see London, far away to the 
left, which was strange, as he had left the site in a north-west wind 
—London should be on his right. Suddenly he remembered that 
Bill had told him something about wind veering with height; the 
wind must be due north up here at 2,800 feet.
All too soon the street ended and he was left floating along above 
millions of little houses, factories, roads, and tiny little playgrounds. 
He edged away to the west, where the country seemed more open.
61

--- PAGE 77 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
At 1,500 feet the variometer showed rise again, and Brian started 
automatically circling, then looked for the source of the lift; a large 
factory about a mile behind him appeared to be the most likely 
place.
The thermal took him to 3,000 feet, then left him to dash down­ 
wind again; the country underneath seeming very crowded and 
unfriendly, Brian edged even more to the west. The country was 
now sprinkled with reservoirs and lakes, with London even more 
huge and unlandable than ever.
Brian sailed over an aerodrome and thought of landing on it, but 
the variometer insisted on showing rise again, so he flew on, leaving 
his chance behind. There was no sign of the grey Kite.
Another aerodrome, Hanforth, was passed on the left, and another 
chance of a safe landing passed as it was left upwind. As soon as 
it became impossible to reach, the lift gave out. Brian looked 
round at it with longing eyes, but knew that he could not reach it 
against the wind. He turned away and flew on, looking for a field. 
Suddenly he saw the familiar white circle, and realised that here 
was yet another aerodrome; a new one, still in the course of con­ 
struction, with strips of harrowed and seeded earth, still brown.
Brian whooped with joy, diving and zooming about the sky; he 
could easily reach this one. He chose a green patch near the new 
skeleton hangars, and glided in to land. The workmen strolled up 
and, pushing their caps on the back of their heads, stood looking 
at the little Hi7, scratching their foreheads.
What's happened to your engine, mate ? " asked one. 
That never had none; that's a glider," added another.
Brian went to a telephone box across the road and rang up the 
club. He was thrilled, as he had achieved Silver C distance, for 
Rooklane, where he had landed, was thirty-nine miles in a straight 
line from Branchester. 
62
cc
(C

--- PAGE 78 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
The workmen helped him dismantle the machine, and he had 
lunch with them, huge slices of bread and cheese.
During the afternoon, he helped the surveyor take measurements 
for yet another field that had to be levelled and added to the landing 
area. 
By tea-time, Jane and Mike Peters had arrived with the 
trailer, so it was not very long before they were once more back at 
the club.
Supper that evening was a very cheery meal. Brian was in the 
best of spirits, and Jane was firing questions at him as fast as she 
could between mouthfuls; but Brian was not in the mood for 
serious talk. He was just crazy with delight; this cross-country 
business was the finest thing yet discovered. Half-way through the 
meal, the pilot of the grey Kite came in. He was greeted with a 
shout from Brian.
" Thank you for showing me how to use those clouds; I have 
never enjoyed myself so much in my life. How far did you get ? "
" Oh, only just south-east of Horsham. Oh, by the way, con­ 
gratulations on the Silver distance."
" Thanks; but come and have something to eat."
" Well, to-morrow's the last day of the camp and the family 
expect us home in time to change for dinner to-morrow night," 
Jane announced sadly.
" Well, I'm going to do my five hours somehow before we go," 
said Brian.
" You'll have to start jolly early, but I think there will be a west 
wind," said the grey Kite pilot. " I hope you have better luck 
than last time."
" So do I," said Brian, with a short laugh.
He was up at six the following morning, wandering about the 
landing-ground by himself; the wind was west, but yet too light to 
be soarable; but it was a wonderful morning, a clear pale sky
63

--- PAGE 79 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
with rippled cirro-cumulus at immense height, forming an arch 
for the rising sun; shadowless, it paled slowly from gold to the purest 
white.
The larks were singing in their thousands, rushing heavenwards 
with the life of the morning.
By seven o'clock quite a strong breeze had arisen, and Brian 
thought it worth while getting the machine out. He pushed back 
the hangar doors and started inspecting the sailplane. This done, 
he woke up his sister and Mike Peters, and went out again to start 
up the retrieving cars. At quarter to eight he was in the air for 
the duration. This time the lift lasted, and at one o'clock he landed, 
a tired and hungry but happy man.
Jane came out to fetch him, and they took the machine back to 
the club. It had been the Hiy's last flight of the Easter holidays, 
for in two days' time the twins were due back at school. They 
derigged the machine, greasing the control pulleys and rubbing 
linseed oil into the skid. Then they tucked it away into the trailer 
for the last time until half-term; for during school time, with only 
Sunday afternoons at the club, there was not time to keep rigging 
and dismantling the machine, it would be easier to fly the club 
G.B.s.
The twins had tea with all their friends and started the old 
argument about upwind and downwind flying. This question, 
although thoroughly thrashed out years ago, never failed to start 
a heated controversy between the many theory kings who abounded 
in the club.
At five o'clock they left the tea-table and the earnest talk. The 
others looked up to say good-bye and good luck, then returned to 
their diagrams on the tablecloth. The twins blew the Hi7 a kiss, 
then drove off home in their father's car, which they had borrowed.
64

--- PAGE 80 ---
CHAPTER IX
Aero-towing
H
" 
OW about getting an aeroplane over ? The wind's north-east
and unsoarable, but it should be a good thermal day. How many 
will guarantee to have a tow ? "
It was Bill who had asked, and several people, looking up from 
their breakfasts, mumbled an assertion. Brian said,
" We'll have one each, if Mac will let us."
" Oh, he'll do that all right; an aero-towed launch is easier than 
a winch launch, and far less strain on the machine."
So Bill rang up the Banner Towing Company and arranged for the 
aeroplane to come and tow sailplanes into the air at eleven o'clock.
Jane and Brian hurriedly rigged the Hi7 and inspected it, signing 
their names in the passing-out book; then towed it over to the end 
of the line of waiting machines. Eleven machines were ready, as 
it was the only chance of a cross-country flight on such a day.
Jack's Adler and the new Minimoa were there, also a little sail­ 
plane they had not seen before, called the Scud II, which was 
entirely unlike any of the other machines. The fuselage was of 
square section, set upon one edge, diamond fashion, and the long, 
narrow wing was supported above it by thin struts which continued 
the vee shape of the bottom half of the diamond. The pilot sat 
in a cut-away cockpit right underneath the wing. The whole 
machine looked light and nippy to handle.
Bill's white Kite and, of course, the grey Kite were there, also 
the pretty Rhonsperber, two G.B.s, a Buzzard, the new Gull, and 
the twins' little Hi7.

--- PAGE 81 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
Soon after eleven o'clock the aeroplane arrived; a big old Avro 
504, with its powerful engine, and a great capacity for flying slowly. 
Sideslipping in just over the power wires, it touched down before 
reaching the hangar ridge.
Bill laid out the 3OO-foot cable and hooked one end into the tail 
release of the aeroplane; to the other he linked a Grunau.
Someone gave the signal to take up slack, as with a winch launch, 
then with a roar the aeroplane started moving. 
The G.B. took 
off almost immediately, climbing to a position about fifteen feet 
above the level of the towing machine. Here it flattened out, 
letting the cable go slack, to enable the aeroplane to take off. 
Maintaining its height a little above the aeroplane, with the cable 
just not taut, the procession sailed away, climbing slowly. The 
twins watched carefully, and four minutes later saw the G.B. 
wheel away in a right-hand turn, and knew that it was free.
The aeroplane also turned, diving straight for the club. At two 
hundred feet over the landing-ground it dropped the cable, pulling 
up into a steep climb, and a stalled turn, to a landing in position 
for the next launch.
In turn they all went off, the big Adler and heavy Minimoa 
steady on the wire, the little Scud jumping about in the bumps.
Brian won the toss for which of them should go first, and clambered 
into the machine; there were still two sailplanes to go before it was 
his turn, but he wanted to be ready. Bill came over and gave the 
twins some hints.
" Take off as soon as you can, and get into a position about 
fifteen feet above the level of the aeroplane. A good check is to 
keep the aeroplane's top wings on the horizon; then let the cable 
go fairly slack while the aeroplane takes off. Never get below it, 
or by pulling its tail down you will make it stall; also, don't get too 
high above it. 
66

--- PAGE 82 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
" If the cable gets very slack, an almighty jerk will result, as you 
will be slowing down, and the aeroplane continuing on; the only 
thing you can do is to sideslip gently to tighten it, then just before 
the jerk comes put the nose right down in line with the cable, so 
that the sailplane absorbs the shock with the least frontal area to 
the airflow.
" If everything gets too bad, just release and either come home 
or see what lift you can get from the height you are at. The pilot 
always drops you upwind from the landing-ground. Anyway, it's 
very easy if you just watch the wire. Oh, another thing: the aero­ 
plane will only give a little bump as it flies through a thermal; 
you, on the other hand, will shoot up a hundred feet or so and get 
right above the aeroplane, so as soon as that happens put the nose 
down, and swishtail a bit with the rudder to prevent yourself 
getting too fast. It's very easy really, and certainly very pleasant. 
I'm after you; see if you can stay up longer than I can."
The big Avro started moving, and the Hi7 took off. 
Climbing 
in a wide sweep, the little caravanserie grew smaller and smaller, 
until at 2,000 feet the sailplane released.
Immediately after pulling the plug Brian thought that something 
had happened to the machine, as the controls seemed non-existent. 
Then he realised that with the higher speed of fifty miles per hour 
on the aero tow the controls became heavier and tighter, and now 
with the normal slow speed of thirty again, the controls felt very 
much lighter; it was a thing to be remembered, as it made everything 
feel rather strange for a moment or two.
Brian played around in a gentle thermal, until he saw Bill's Kite 
launched and rise swiftly to his level. The white sailplane released, 
flying about a mile upwind from the Hi7, and sinking slowly. 
Brian was exultant, he was staying up, while Bill, experienced, 
brilliant Bill, was sinking back into the earth; already he had lost

--- PAGE 83 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
i ,000 feet. Brian gave a loud cheer and continued circling. Ten 
minutes later the lift gently died out, and Brian was forced to look 
for other support. He flew cross-wind to a village near the club, 
which he hoped would provide a thermal. As he arrived, he got 
the surprise of his life, for there was the white Kite, circling tightly 
and climbing above him; the machine he thought had departed 
from the sky. He dashed after it and circled in the same place, 
but the air was dead. Bill had just got into the bottom of the lift. 
The Hi7 sank lower and lower and finally turned for home, landing 
up the gulley. Brian lay on his back, shoulders across the wing tip, 
and watched the white bird slowly disappear into the oblivion of 
the deepening sky.
Jane had her first tow directly after lunch, when conditions had 
improved, and was lucky in getting a really good thermal before 
sinking below 900 feet.
She was so determined not to let Brian stay ahead of her in their 
struggle for the Silver C, that she seized her chance and made good 
use of the lift. The base of the scattered clouds was high, and the 
thermal took her to just under 5,000 feet before petering out. The 
wind was very light and she had difficulty in tracing the path of 
the cloud shadows over the ground in order to see which way to 
go. Apart from this, hers was a very easy flight, as the air above 
3,000 feet seemed to be full of lift, and comparatively smooth; so 
only once, when she sank to little more than 1,500 feet, did she 
really have to worry; her progress was very slow, however, and it 
took nearly three hours to cover forty-two miles, by which time the 
best of the day had gone and the air become quite flat.
She landed in a large field between a pinewood and a stream, 
a little picture-book cottage nestling in one corner enclosed by a 
low bramble hedge, and in the porch were two occupied deck- 
chairs; Jane turned the machine wing into wind and weighted it 
68

--- PAGE 84 ---
^tfw^f'^^
,-;;,. 
• t^l^^^^/^^m^m?^^f- 
"-''W®
"'•^, -^^m^^
^^^v-ir^^^;^--';;^^-:;'^
sailplane was towed up to 2,000 ft. (see page 67)

--- PAGE 85 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
with some clods of earth, and walked over to the cottage. The 
occupants of the deck-chairs were asleep. One was a tall man with 
blue corduroy trousers, sandals over bare feet, a pink open-necked 
shirt, and dark curly hair and beard. The other, a woman of short 
stature, also bare-legged with sandals, was wearing a rough Harris 
tweed skirt and an embroidered Russian blouse; she had little gold 
ear-rings and an Eton crop. The man was snoring, and a purring 
cat lay on the sleeping woman's lap. Jane coughed and stood 
watching them with some interest, but feeling rather embarrassed.
The man opened one eye. 
" Issie, at last your successor has 
come. Hullo, my fairy Queen; the day is beautiful, is it not? " 
was his extraordinary comment.
Jane stuttered a little. " Hullo, I'm very sorry, but I've landed 
in your field."
" A fairy Queen in all senses. Where are your magic carpet and 
team of dragonflies ? "
" If you mean the Hi7, it's over there," said Jane dryly.
Issie woke up. " Don't listen to him. Rabbit talks awful tripe. 
What do you want, anyway ? "
Jane explained about her flight, and asked if she could use the 
telephone.
Issie said, " You'll find it in the eating-room," and settled down 
to sleep again. Rabbit, however, leapt to his feet and paced up 
and down the lawn.
" At last. At last," he muttered to himself.
Jane got on to Dick Byrd, who was waiting to hear where the 
big Adler had landed; he took down the message and promised to 
give it to Brian. Jane glanced hurriedly through the window. 
" Tell him to hurry; they're all mad here," she whispered. Byrd 
laughed and rang off. Jane went out again.
" Where is thy faithful steed ? " Rabbit said, wagging his beard.
69

--- PAGE 86 ---
cc 
cc
SILENT FLIGHT
" Over there," said Jane. " Do you think that you could help 
me dismantle it, so that it will be ready when my brother comes to 
fetch me ? "
All right," said Issie, without a smile. 
We are slaves at your feet," said Rabbit.
They walked across the field, Issie taking the same size strides as 
six-foot Rabbit.
They found a small crowd round the machine, people who were 
only too willing to help, and soon the parts were safely stowed away 
under a hedge.
Rabbit had hit his thumb twice with the hammer, but was in 
raptures with himself over an inspiration the Hi7 and Jane had 
given him for a new and modern fairy story. 
Issie, on the other 
hand, was very strong and reliable, in spite of her lack of speech.
When it was finished, they went back to the cottage for a meal; 
Rabbit set the table while Jane was given a heap of fairy-tale 
manuscripts to read and give an opinion on. 
Issie shortly appeared 
with the food, which consisted of rough brown-grey bread, lettuce 
leaves, raw carrots, cheese and butter, wild strawberries and cream, 
and dandelion wine. Jane liked the strawberries and cream the 
best.
Brian and Mike Peters arrived shortly afterwards, and soon 
everything was ready to leave. 
Good-bye," said Issie. 
Farewell, spirit of the air," called Rabbit.
When they were well on the way home, Brian said, " Well, now 
you've got your distance, we're both equal, with only the height 
to get."
" I got it to-day, but had no barograph, so it does not count for 
the Silver."
" Ha, that proves I am going to get mine first, as I said."
70
cc 
cc

--- PAGE 87 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
66 You know," said Jane reflectively, " this thermal stuff is nothing 
more or less than what we learn at school; hot air rises, and all that. 
I think it's worth learning up."
" Yes, I think so," said Brian. " It seems that the extra bit of 
theory just makes the difference between a good and a first-class 
flight. I'm going to read it all up before the summer holidays, 
then I shall be certain of getting my Silver before you."
" We'll see about that," said Jane.

--- PAGE 88 ---
CHAPTER X
Loops and Launches
JL HE beginning of the summer holidays saw the twins arriving 
with laden suitcases at the club. They were in good spirits, and 
also had with them a bulky canvas bag containing a parachute, 
given to them by their parents, because at last they had managed 
to leave school with a good report. The Matric. and Cranwell 
entrance results had not come through yet, so the twins were going 
to make the best of their holiday in case they had failed. If they 
had, Brian was destined for his father's office, and his sister to a 
secretarial college, instead of the Royal Air Force for him, and the 
writing of flying stories for Jane.
They arrived just in time to get the beloved Hi7 rigged for a 
winch circuit each before supper. It was good to see all their 
friends again, for during exams, it had been impossible to get over 
to the club. All the usual faces were there, wearing the usual 
clothes, and the same assortment of funny hats. 
Dick Byrd 
had got a new scar across his nose from another motor 
smash, and the owner of the Viking had bought some bright- 
green silk overalls, with zip fasteners in all possible places, 
which he resolutely wore while flying, saying that they kept him 
warm.
It seemed years since they had been at the club, but everything 
appeared to be exactly the same; there was still a large pile of 
broken secondaries in the back of the hangar, still the same pile of 
magazines in the clubhouse.
The next day was calm and hot, showing evidences of strong 
72

--- PAGE 89 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
thermal lift, so Brian and Jane settled down to try for the Silver 
height straight away.
Brian was still determined to get his first, but Jane was equally 
determined to beat him.
Two days later, Jane got a thermal off the winch, and climbed 
rapidly; would she get that magic 3,000 feet ? 
She fingered the 
barograph in its locker lovingly, and went on turning. The 
altimeter crept up slowly to the 3,ooo-foot mark, then 3,100 feet; 
Jane felt very excited, while Brian watched, a blank stare on his 
face, saying nothing.
The variometer was still showing rise, and soon the little Hi7 
was calmly floating at just under 4,000 feet. Jane was so thrilled that 
she decided to throw a loop, the thought of which sobered her down 
immediately. She had seen Jack do one in the Adler, and had asked 
him afterwards how it was done. He told her it was just too easy.
" Just dive to about sixty miles an hour, then pull the stick right 
back firmly, but not all at once, and wait. When everything 
appears normal again just go on flying as though nothing had 
happened," he had said.
Jane took a deep breath and pushed the stick forward; the airspeed 
needle rushed upward—sixty miles an hour. Jane pulled the stick 
back, harder and faster as the load fell away. She held it in her 
stomach, while wide expanses of blue sky and brown earth whistled 
about in all directions. She felt herself being pushed through the 
seat, then everything went quiet; opening her eyes, she found herself 
the right way up, and just on the point of stalling. Easing the nose 
down, she said in a loud and deliberate voice,
" I enjoyed that; I must do another one." The second one did 
not feel nearly so frightening, and by the third one, Jane had found 
looping a very pleasant sensation; after all, it was only a case of 
getting used to it.
F 
73

--- PAGE 90 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
Ahead of her was a quiet glide back to the club, so she ate some 
chocolate and dug the barograph out of the pigeon-hole; she looked 
in the little window to admire the inked graph, but the chart was 
clean and new; she had forgotten to put any ink in the pen! She 
put it back, feeling very silly; she had just given the Silver away to 
her brother.
The following day, the big Avro came up to the club again to 
give aero-tows; the wind was blowing down the hill, strongly enough 
to make the height obtainable from winch launches useless for 
thermal catching, due to the downdraught all over the club grounds.
The aeroplane was towing the sailplanes to 2,000 feet, and Brian 
in his turn was lucky to connect with lift almost immediately. He 
circled quite unconcernedly, climbing at five feet per second in 
air that was quite smooth. At 4,800 feet the thermal gently died, 
but Brian was quite satisfied although rather cold; he also tried 
Jane's evolution of the day before on the way down. Jane met 
him on landing.
" I've got my Silver all right," he said. 
" Look, 4,800 feet on 
the chart."
" Less 2,000 feet on the wire, that makes 2,800 feet," observed 
Jane with a smile.
" Oh, I'd forgotten about the height of the tow not counting; 
looks as though you'll get it first after all." Brian looked so miserable 
that Jane could not help laughing.
Three days after this occurrence, the wind had veered round to 
west, and was blowing just enough to be soarable. Good cumulus 
had formed by quarter to eleven, although cloud base was rather 
low, at 2,600 feet.
Just before lunch, Jane got some good lift over the Bastion, and 
after some hectic circling low down managed to reach cloud base, 
which by this time had gone up to 3,000 feet. Only 200 feet more
74

--- PAGE 91 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
to get, and could she cloud-fly long enough without getting into 
trouble ? 
Cruising around slowly, she let herself be drawn up 
into the swirling grey mist; it was more bumpy inside the cloud, 
but Jane avoided making any more control movements than were 
necessary. The Hi7 had not any blind-flying instruments, but 
Jane stroked the parachute harness instead with confidence.
The altimeter read 3,158 feet; not much more now. Jane turned 
to keep in the slowly weakening lift, fog deadening the sound 
of the machine. The needle of the airspeed indicator slowly went 
up to forty-five miles per hour, so Jane eased the stick back in 
order to slow up; the needle flickered up to fifty, then fifty-five miles 
per hour; Jane pulled the stick right back—sixty miles per hour, arid 
the wind shrieking in her ears tearing her hair. 
She noticed the 
same sinking feeling as in her first loop. 
Sixty-five miles per hour, 
the stick would not go any farther back; she tried a little rudder to 
see what would happen; the H17 reared up into some violent posi­ 
tion like a startled horse, then everything went silent; Jane gripped 
the edge of the dashboard even more tightly. The airspeed 
indicator read nothing, the needle lying idly below stalling speed.
She was wondering what to do next when a brilliant flash of 
light dazzled her. 
She blinked and looked round. The sky was 
serene and blue, the earth peaceful far below, and she was spinning 
gently down. 
Correcting, she levelled out and glared at the 
clutching grey monster above her. 
She flew around quietly for a 
while to calm herself and look for the club grounds; finding them 
away to the north-west, she flew back and landed to tell Brian of 
her experiences; the barograph chart resolutely reading 3,150 feet.
For the next few days the twins did winch circuits incessantly in 
their efforts to beat the other. The friendly rivalry between these two 
was causing a great deal of interest among the other club members, 
one of whom had made a book on the race. The twins also came
75

--- PAGE 92 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
in for a certain amount of teasing, which was given and taken in 
good part; at any rate, it was a change from the everlasting shop 
of the theory kings.
Neither of them had any luck at all until nearly a week later, 
when Brian happened to be soaring in the warm-sector weather of 
a small depression, and was in the air when the fragments of the 
following cold front came along. 
He found that suddenly, for no 
apparent reason, he was higher than he had been, in spite of the 
complete lack of thermic activity. The sky had been overcast with 
high cirro-stratus and ragged alto-cumulus since about 10 a.m., 
and the cold front had rather the same untidy appearance. Brian 
realised its significance only just in time, and managed to cling on 
to an extra black mass. He wandered round, exploring the regions 
of lift, finding the best area on the front edge of the cloud, and a 
horrible downdraught in the rear. He had read a great deal about 
the theory of cold fronts, how the cold air from the poles undercut 
the warmer air from the equatorial and temperate regions, throwing 
it upward with great violence; it was on this line of aerial upheaval 
that it was possible to soar.
The lift was powerful, but did not extend very high; Brian 
struggled for about an hour to get that 3,200 feet, flying as slowly 
as he dare to get as much help as possible from the machine. The 
ground, however, was rising slowly underneath him, becoming 
fairly hilly, and it may have been this factor that gave him that 
extra boost up. Anyway, he just got it; the altimeter gave him 
3,400 feet, and the barograph about the same. He was extremely 
pleased, and landed as soon as possible so that Jane should not have 
so far to come and fetch him. The front had been moving very 
slowly, and he was only about twenty miles from home.
As soon as Jane heard his voice over the telephone, she knew that 
he had won, and was both glad and sorry at the same time. 
She

--- PAGE 93 ---
J-S-^ c 
- 
- 
v '"
Brian also tried looping on the way down (see page 74)

--- PAGE 94 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
would have liked to prove to him that she was just as good a 
pilot as he was; and yet she had really achieved her Silver height 
with her distance flight, only she had no barograph. She had really 
won by a long way; it was only a matter of luck, but luck plays a 
big part, even in the finest sport in the world.
77

--- PAGE 95 ---
CHAPTER XI
The Thunderstorm 
" C^
vJTOSH, look at that! " cried Brian, leaping to his feet.
The others sat up slowly, brushing the grass from their hair and 
clothes.
" What is the matter ? " asked Bill.
" Well, look at that thunderstorm over there; it seems to be 
coming this way too."
" Hm, not too bad, if it doesn't float away to the north and pass 
us by."
" Not bad! It's terrific, the top must be at least 18,000 feet high! 
I'm going to have a crack at it, anyway."
" Even if it's my turn to fly ? " asked Jane.
" Oh, yes, so it is; but remember, I'll never forgive you if you 
muck it up."
Jane gave Brian a patient look, and got up to help him out with 
the machine. The day was hot and sultry, although the sky had 
been fairly clear since early morning, and now on the troubled 
south-west horizon lay a storm; still small with distance, it never­ 
theless looked as hard and menacing as a solid row of snow-clad 
mountains; and rising from its midst was the anvil cloud—the heart 
of the tempest—like an eruption from a giant volcano. As the 
storm approached, growing blue-black and furious, a slight breeze 
sprang up, blowing in sharp short gusts; while the anvil, spreading 
up the sky like an evil octopus, groped at the sun, swallowing it.
People were rushing about, sweat glistening on their foreheads, 
getting machines out before it was too late, and launching others;

--- PAGE 96 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
two were in the air, beating up and down the hill, then flying slowly 
towards the boiling, dazzling cloud, rising imperceptibly as the 
unquenchable fury moved on.
Jane was the next away, followed as quickly as possible by the 
Buzzard. 
She tailed the Adler and the white Kite, like a puppy 
dog on a lead, until she felt sure of her position. The Buzzard, 
however, was just too late, being launched into the heavy rain and 
downdraught which followed the upthrust of the storm front.
Brian and the others retrieved him, then made a dash for the 
hangar, where they shook off as much wet as possible and tried to 
peer through the heavy curtain of water to get a glimpse of the 
three human birds wheeling and circling high above the earth in 
the sunshine.
They went into the clubhouse.
" Letter for you, sir," said the steward; " it's just come."
Brian tore it open, recognising his father's handwriting. It 
informed him, in the usual short, quiet style of his father's letters, 
that he had passed into Cranwell, and he might also tell Jane that 
she had managed to scrape through Matric. Brian let out a howl 
of joy, and danced round the room, while his friends looked on in 
mild astonishment.
Meanwhile, Jane had lost sight of the other two sailplanes and 
was scuttling round like a frightened rabbit in and out of the little 
ragged cloudlets which kept forming suddenly all around her. 
After a while she got above them and flew up and down on the 
edge of the mass, not daring to enter it, after her previous experience. 
The other two were apparently inside.
Jane could not see much of the cloud formation from where she 
was, so contented herself with just floating up and down in a patch 
of good lift in front of the swirling vapour. 
After a while, she 
decided to continue along the front, in order to see how long the
79

--- PAGE 97 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
beat was; she turned north-east, flying at 5,000 feet, well over 
Silver C height, in reasonably smooth air. Five minutes later Jane 
found herself climbing rapidly in an atmosphere that was unplea­ 
santly rough. She flew out ahead of the lift to get a better view 
of what was happening, and found that the cloud into which they 
had been launched was only a subsidiary part of the storm, which 
even now was slowly breaking up. The real heart of the thunder­ 
cloud was the part that she had just flown away from. She turned 
back into the powerful lift, bucking about like a dinghy in a rough 
sea, listening to the violent thunder, and starting every time the 
lightning flickered on the glass of the instrument dials. The vario­ 
meter showed fifteen feet per second rise, and again wisps of cloud 
were rapidly forming and disappearing all round her.
She looked quickly at the earth through a gap below her. It 
seemed very, very far away, and made her feel extremely lonely; 
she glanced back at her friendly, hateful cloud. It was very cold, 
and Jane sat shivering as her breath frosted on the windscreen. 
The altimeter was reading 9,000 feet, and she was still being drawn 
rapidly, roughly, upwards. Would it never stop ? 
She wanted to 
land and smell the grass, and talk to people again, instead of being 
bounced about nearly two miles above the earth.
Suddenly cloud formed all about her, swallowing the machine; 
Jane flew straight, hoping to get out, but the cloud was growing 
faster than she was flying. The variometer rose to twenty, but the 
air seemed to be a little smoother. Jane was determined not to 
turn or let the altitude of the machine change to any marked 
degree, so as not to get into the difficulties of last time; she held 
the rudder with both feet, pressing down as hard as possible, and 
jammed the stick by holding her elbows stiffly against the cockpit 
sides. The altimeter crept up to 14,000 feet, then slowed down. 
Jane felt terribly excited, miserable, and happy. The cloud grew 
80

--- PAGE 98 ---
P%ff^ - ">\ jjts^^e******0 
^^wtfft**^' -
beaten the British height record

--- PAGE 99 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
light, then darkened again. The variometer had sunk to five feet 
rise, and the air was quite smooth. 
Suddenly the cloud broke and, 
still rising slowly, Jane found herself in a world of shining beauty. 
Cloud mountains rose on all sides, with dove-grey valleys and rifts; 
the sky was brilliant and clear above, the clouds dazzling white, 
with blue-mauve shadows behind the snowy peaks; the anvil still 
rose as a wall of swirling mist far above, glistening faint rainbow 
colours. Of the earth there was none. Jane was very cold, and 
although not in any mood to appreciate the scene could not help 
gasping at its magnificence. 
She turned away, flying with the 
sun behind her, hoping to get ahead of the storm front again. She 
neared the bank of clouds ahead and, silently rising, floated over 
the top, to see the ground. Very far below, and seeming strangely 
clean and tidy, while away to the right lay the sea; a blue-green sea, 
with great depth of colour, the sky above it pale and clear.
Jane flew out ahead of the cloud, sinking only very slowly, and 
in patches still maintaining her height. She flew on, the storm 
receding again into solidity behind her.
At 7,000 feet again, her rate of sinking increased, and soon she 
began to feel warm once more.
A short time later she had sunk low enough to be able to choose 
a large even field, towards which she flew, cheerfully disregarding 
a nice fat thermal on the way. 
She threw a loop, and circled 
around several times losing height; then floated into the field and 
landed. Just as she touched down, a piece of wire from a no longer 
existent fence caught on the launching hook; the Hi7 reared up on 
its nose, then toppled gently over, coming to rest inverted.
Jane hung upside-down in the straps, not knowing whether to 
laugh or cry; she groped for the barograph and read it. 
Dropping 
it on the grass above her head, she laughed. She had beaten the 
British height record, unless Bill or Jack had in turn beaten her.
81

--- PAGE 100 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
She laughed loudly, pleased with what she had done, and happy 
to be on the earth again, even if the wrong way up.
A voice asked, " Are you all right ? "
Jane stopped laughing and said, " Yes, thank you, but I can't 
get out."
" O.K., hang on; we'll soon have you the right way up."
" Don't pull on the trailing edge," said Jane nervously.
" That's all right; I fly aeroplanes myself."
" Sorry," said Jane, " but I couldn't tell that from your voice."
The man laughed, and Jane felt the Hi 7 being tipped upwards. 
She could hear her rescuers breathing heavily as they strained to 
lift the tail. Once vertical, it was easy, and soon she was able to 
get out and see her helpers. There were about ten of them; 
women in smart summer dresses and tennis clothes; men wearing 
flannels, with beautifully brushed hair; an elderly man with a 
white moustache, and, obviously his wife, a still pretty woman, 
completed the group.
" Thank you," said Jane. " It was that piece of wire that did it, 
catching in the launching hook."
" Bad luck," said one of the men. " I can't think why you 
weren't hurt."
" Come and have some tea, my dear," said the elderly lady. 
" You look very cold."
" I was, but it's warm enough down here."
They all sat down to tea on the lawn, in front of the big white 
stone house, and insisted on Jane telling of her adventures.
She told of the storm, of the glorious moments above the clouds, 
and the frightening moments within. 
She told of the record, and 
the two other machines, and her friends at the club; and when 
she had finished answering all the questions asked her by the in­ 
terested party, the elderly man said, " I own a paper which is
82

--- PAGE 101 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
supposed to cover all the sports in England, and I have been looking 
for someone to do the Gliding section each week. If you can write 
as well as you can fly, then you are just who I want. 
What about 
it?"
Jane was speechless with excitement; this was even better than 
writing flying stories. 
She would be putting on record real flights, 
real achievements, for those to read who would take up soaring in 
perhaps many years to come.
She had just managed to stutter her thanks when the butler 
arrived on the lawn, accompanied by Brian and Michael Peters. 
The two were given tea, cakes, and ice-cream, and Jane had once 
again to recount her adventures and proudly display the record 
barograph chart, with the purple-inked line just crossing the 15,000- 
foot mark.
" And I've been asked to write on gliding for Colonel Barrows's 
paper," she finished triumphantly.
Brian grinned. " And you've passed Matric. and I've got into 
the R.A.F.," he said, handing Jane their father's letter.
THE END
