
--- PAGE 1 ---
Silen t Fligh t

--- PAGE 2 ---
SILENT FLIGHT

--- PAGE 3 ---
. 
• 
• •'«^i •-••,,. 
. 
• ."• ••'."•.. 
• -•: 
..
• 
' -'.>YV 
' 
'•'- 
"" ''"'-I 
• 
- I 
^ '• "..•'
y.'.::;.Y ' V . :.'r-.,':-:.^' •"-:'.'• ;
- ;•''';jf*%»?^.'
;:?*':'•
••W 
% jW^' ••;•,;.. '•>'. 
Y. v
.•^f\-fy$ij£$':^'A* fr;:•'-';,, -' ^'5'S
;g|
fe' 
'';'''^:::^y^,Cr 
: ' : ;i':v.//s^v^ . ':-w' 
';^> 3P
( '^/'^^^.V''^'''.''!''^^^!.^ 
"V".;"''.;"";;.;:;..";' "
••' : iis', 
. 
•'•' .^-•V. K-j(-!i,''j*r<-':''
•: ^tfj.&£iwtyswr
%:•-.., 
'^r %$>%$$'
*^i$4^'''$$$$;
- 
'XfeV';"
•••jMfM."
77 rising slowly, Jane found herself in a world of shining
beauty (see page

--- PAGE 4 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
by 
ANN C. EDMONDS
Illustrated by 
PATRICK NICOLLS
LONDON 
COUNTRY LIFE LTD.

--- PAGE 5 ---
FIRST PUBLISHED .... 1939
Made and Printed in Great Britain by 
Hazell> Watson <2? Viney Ltd., London and Aylesbury

--- PAGE 6 ---
Contents
CHAPTER 
PAGE
I. 
MYSTERY MODEL 
....... 
I
II. 
THE FIRST FLIGHT 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
.II
III. 
HOPPERY AND CRASHERY 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. IJ
IV. 
CROSS-COUNTRIES AND RETRIEVING PARTIES 
. 
. 
.23
V. 
C STANDS FOR SOARING 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
.34
VI. 
AUTUMN AND THE FIRST WINCH LAUNCH 
. 
. 
.39
VII. 
FIVE HOURS 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
, 
. 
.46
VIII. 
THE FIRST DEPARTURE 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
.55
IX. 
AERO-TOWING ........ 
65
X. 
LOOPS AND LAUNCHES 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
.72
XI. 
THE THUNDERSTORM 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
.78

--- PAGE 7 ---
List of Plates
STILL RISING SLOWLY, JANE FOUND HERSELF IN A WORLD OF
SHINING BEAUTY (see page 81) 
.... 
Frontispiece
FACING PAGE
THE GAR DREW, SQUEALING, TO A STANDSTILL 
. 
. 
.12
"THESE ARE GALLED THE AILERONS" . 
. 
. 
. 
.21
THE 
KITE LEFT THE GROUND . . . AND SWEPT STEEPLY
UPWARD ......... 24
THEY WERE ALLOWED TO FLY THE FALCON 
. 
. 
. 
31
" I THINK I'VE BROKEN MY SPINE "..... 34
WOODERS HAD STARTED TO ASSEMBLE ONE WING 
. 
. 
.4!
SHE FOUND LIFT, . . . AND WAS ABLE TO CIRCLE AS WELL 
. 
57
HE TURNED AWAY AND FLEW TOWARDS THE ZOO 
. 
. 
. 
60
THE SAILPLANE WAS TOWED UP TO 2,OOO FEET ... 69
BRIAN ALSO TRIED LOOPING ON THE WAY DOWN ... 76
SHE HAD BEATEN THE BRITISH HEIGHT RECORD 
. 
. 
81
Vll

--- PAGE 8 ---
CHAPTER I
Mystery Model
T
cJ ANE held the model up nose into wind, and swung it gently into 
the air. The rubber motor whirred smoothly as it climbed away.
" Look, you haven't even set it right; it's going to stall."
The model was still climbing in large circles, bucking about in 
the slight turbulence of the air, when a stronger gust caught it. 
As the motor ran out the nose reared up, and it stalled, diving into 
the ground.
Jane and Brian, the sixteen-year-old twins, ran over to the 
scattered components. Brian picked them up and made a critical 
examination.
" You'll never be a good pilot; look at the way you flew that; 
and you've damaged it—see this hole in the wing ? "
" I flew it jolly well; it was only because the engine cut, and that 
might happen to anybody. We can easily put a patch on the 
wing."
" And who is going to do that ? 
Me, as usual, I suppose," said 
Brian sarcastically.
They carried the monoplane back to the repair box, and laid it 
reverently on the ground. Brian got out the dope, while Jane cut 
a patch of tissue paper.
It was a very warm day, and the air above the grass shimmered 
in the heat. The sky was a brilliant blue, with little white clouds 
wandering slowly over, far above. The massive elms at the end 
of the paddock stood silent and still, overawed by the oppressive 
warmth.

--- PAGE 9 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
The twins, bending over the model, concentrated on the careful 
fitting of the flimsy patch. In appearance they were alike, both 
having dark, curly hair, and healthy, tanned complexions. Both 
were slim, yet strongly built; but Brian was just one inch taller, and 
usually plastered his hair flat with water and some exceedingly 
sticky substance, as he thought that curls were too effeminate for 
one of his importance. Jane, on the other hand, was more easy­ 
going and, in her carefree way, never worried about her appearance, 
or the self-confidence of her brother. 
They were very fond of 
each other, but always tried not to show it.
66 Dad's furious about our half-term reports ; he's threatened to 
forbid us to have any more models if we don't improve."
" I know, but I hate Maths. How can I help it if I always get 
a bad report ? "
" Well, how can I help it with Science, in a smelly room, doing 
smelly experiments ? And I'm sure old Phillpots doesn't like me."
" Well, old Miss Pinner hates me; she's always telling me not to 
look out of the window, and that all aeroplanes are the same, 
anyway, which they are not."
" Going to school isn't going to help me when I'm in the Air 
Force."
" What about your entrance exam. ? "
" Oh yes, I'd forgotten about that. Here, careful with that dope, 
it's a shilling a bottle, and we've only got ninepence between us. 
I'm always short in term-time."
The new panel in the wing grew smooth and taut as the strong- 
smelling liquid dried and evaporated. Brian fitted the wings over 
the fuselage stubs and, giving them a professional twist, pronounced 
the little aeroplane airworthy. Jane wound up the airscrew, 
breathfully counting the turns as she flicked the prop over with 
her finger. 
2

--- PAGE 10 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
When it was ready, Brian took it from her, holding the airscrew 
still with his hand. He raised it above his head, released the 
motor, and with a slow swing forward of his arm launched it into 
the quivering air; nicely trimmed, it settled down and circled 
busily upwards.
" It's going jolly well," said Jane.
" Well, I told you girls couldn't fly. It wants a man's touch. 
Look, it's higher than the elms."
" But the engine's stopped, and it's still climbing."
" Gosh, so it is. It's even drifting over the top of the trees."
The little monoplane was, in fact, getting higher. The airscrew 
was dead, but it was still being drawn towards the dazzling blue, 
the gently moving air wafting it slowly nearer the solid elms. But 
it was high, a mere speck in a sea of spotless brightness, and as it 
neared the trees, it floated quietly over the top.
" Come on, we'll lose it if we don't see it land ; this hay is awful 
for finding anything."
They ran through the long grass, leaving a trail of buttercup 
petals and pollen heavy in the air behind them. Jumping the 
ditch at the far end, they broke a way through the hawthorn 
hedge, shielding their faces with an upraised arm. It was cool in 
the eternal shade of the elms, and Jane paused for breath before 
leaping the farther ditch; but Brian had jumped across and was 
gazing into the blue.
" Look, it's still flying. It's frightfully high," he shouted.
Jane took a flying leap, and landed in a heap at her brother's 
feet. He helped her up and remarked that girls couldn't jump, 
anyway. But the usual retort was forgotten as they both gazed at 
the little ghostly object high above.
" It looks a bit strange," said Jane. " It seems to have got 
longer wings."
3

--- PAGE 11 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
" It does look funny. I wonder what's happened."
" That's not our model, it's an aeroplane, a real one. 
The sky 
is so dazzling it is difficult to see."
" Don't be silly, it's going too slowly, and, anyway, there's no 
noise. It's getting lower, and it's turning. 
Looks as though it 
doesn't want to go over the sea."
" It's a lovely machine, but why hasn't it got an engine ? It just 
seems to be floating on the air."
" I think it is going to land here," breathed Jane.
" I rather think you're right for once."
The big bird floated silently over their heads about 600 feet up, 
and turned lazily towards the windward side of the field. The sun 
was flashing and glinting on the wings, and it seemed transparent 
against the deep-blue sky. It came lower, then, pointing one 
shining, tapered wing earthward, slipped steeply in to the field. 
When the dark old elms became its background, it levelled up and 
after a few seconds' glide came to rest with a gentle swish in the 
heavily scented hayfield.
Jane and Brian stood transfixed, and for the space of several 
seconds the immediate world was silent, motionless. 
Then, with 
a yell, they dashed across the field to the machine.
They arrived just as the pilot had taken off the transparent cockpit 
cover and was getting out. He was tall, with fair hair and a sun­ 
burnt face, and Jane liked the look of him very much, but Brian 
was too much taken up with the white, gull-like machine to notice.
" Could you hold that wing tip down," the pilot said, " until I 
can get a weight for it ? "
" I will," said Jane. " Brian, go and get that log from the ditch."
" Do you know where I can telephone ? " he asked, smiling at 
Jane.
" You can use ours, if you like; it's about the nearest."
4

--- PAGE 12 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
" Thanks. Will my Kite be all right here ? "
" Oh yes; there's no one within miles of us. All these fields belong 
to my father."
" You're very lucky."
Brian staggered up with the heavy piece of wood over his shoulder. 
The pilot helped him lay it gently on the wing tip.
" Thanks; not even a tornado would lift it now," he said.
" He wants to telephone," said Jane.
" If I may, please."
" Oh, sure; you come with me," said Brian.
" How did you get here ? " asked Jane.
" I came on the wind, supported by the sun," the pilot said 
quizzically.
" You what ? Anyway, what's happened to your engine ? "
" Engine ? I have none. I told you, I flew on the wind, hitched 
to a cloud."
" Don't be silly; all aeroplanes have engines."
" Yes, but my birdie isn't an aeroplane, it's a sailplane—a glider 
if you like."
" But gliders are stupid-looking, stringy things, like five-barred 
gates."
" Only the primary machines on which you learn. Sailplanes 
are super gliders. Mine's a sailplane. You can go hundreds of 
miles in them."
" Hundreds of miles without an engine ? Anyway, where have 
you come from ? "
" Only Branchester, about sixty miles."
" You've come sixty miles in that! "
" Yes, why not ? It was easy to-day."
" How ? "
" I told you, I hitched on to the clouds."
5

--- PAGE 13 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
" I know, but—— Oh, well, here's the telephone."
They had walked across the paddock and the lawn, and were 
entering the big cool hall of the house. Jane led the way across 
the floor in the suddenly dim light.
" Thanks. Hullo, Branchester 419. ... Hullo, Mark, Bill 
here. I'm at—here, you two, where am I ? "
" Elton, near Maybury. This house is called El ton Lodge, and 
it's three miles out of Maybury on the main road."
Bill told his friend all the details and rang off.
" Thank you; Mark's coming to collect me with the trailer about 
half-past nine."
" Well, you'd better stay and have dinner with us; Jane, go and 
tell cook to get some more food, while we go and have a look at 
the machine."
" Hang on, old chap, we might wait for your sister; anyway, I 
would very much like you both to help me take it to bits, if you 
would ? "
" Yes, rather. Hurry up, Jane."
Five minutes later they were back beside the machine, having 
collected the gardener on the way.
They removed the wing root fairing, and Brian started taking 
out all the safety-pins and split-pins. Bill was wrestling with the 
tailplane fittings. Jane was admiring the interior of the cockpit, 
and the gardener was gazing in mute wonder.
All the split-pins out, Jane and the gardener held the wing tips, 
while Bill knocked out the heavy pins which held on the wings. 
Brian was standing ready to take the weight. A few more taps 
with the hammer and the wing was free, so while Brian held the 
fuselage upright, Jane and Bill carried the wing over to the shade 
of the hedge and laid it carefully down. Fifteen minutes later the 
other wing lay beside it. Then came a slow procession of fuselage, 
6

--- PAGE 14 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
tailplane, cockpit cover, and struts, until everything was tucked 
away under the hedge.
" There's a lane on the other side, down which a car can get, so 
it should be all right here. Now let's go and have dinner," added 
Brian.
They walked back to the house through the still heated air; the 
shadows across the lawn were lengthening slowly, and gnats played 
round the trees.
" I'm afraid that dinner's rather early," said Jane. " But it is 
half-term, and Mother likes us to keep the same meal-times as school, 
in case we get indigestion or something."
" I like it early," said Brian. " Then we have a chance to pinch 
some cake or apples before going to bed."
Jane led the way into the dining-room, where their parents were 
already seated, in evening dress. Bill felt rather embarrassed in his 
open-necked shirt and flannel trousers. Jane, however, was not at 
all abashed.
" Come and sit here," she said. " Oh, Mother, this is Bill; he's 
just flown here."
" In a sailplane," added Brian. " Here, Bill, come and sit beside 
me."
Jane glared at him fiercely, and Bill, noticing it, went and sat 
beside her.
" I must apologise for my appearance and intrusion," he said. 
" But your son very kindly asked me to stay. 
I hope you 
don't mind."
" Oh, not at all, we're delighted to have you. 
Brian's always 
asking people in."
" Is it right that you flew here ? " asked their father. " Where 
did you land ? 
I didn't hear anything. Did you have engine 
trouble ? "
7

--- PAGE 15 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
" It's true that I flew here; I landed in one of your fields. 
But 
I have no engine. I came here in a sailplane—a glider."
" You came in a glider ? Where from ? "
" Only Branchester."
" Only Branchester ? 
But that is sixty miles."
" That's no distance; people have done over four hundred miles 
in gliders."
" Have they, though ? 
How do you stay up ? "
" Well, the theory is that if you are flying in air that is rising 
faster than you are gliding down, then you can stay up in the air. 
You see, machines have been made very efficient, so that you get a 
very flat angle of glide—about one in twenty or twenty-five average, 
and a sinking speed of only two or three feet per second; then if 
you can get into any air that is rising at more than two or three 
feet per second, you will go up with it."
" What sort of air goes up ? " asked Brian.
" Well, for instance, if a hill or ridge faces the wind, the wind 
cannot go through it, so it has to go over the top, and in doing so, 
it has to rise; so if you fly up and down in front of the ridge and 
keep in the air that is continually going over the top, then you will 
stay up."
" But you didn't come here on a hill."
" No. On hot days you also find rising air over villages, corn­ 
fields, or contrasting bits of landscape. The air above these parts 
gets hotter more quickly than that over water and woods, and rises 
in big columns up to about three or four thousand feet—we call 
them thermals. 
Sometimes clouds like cauliflowers form at the top 
of them. To-day was a very good day."
" It sounds great fun; but what happens if the air goes down 
instead of up ? " asked their mother. " You crash, I suppose ? "
" Oh no; it only makes you sink a bit faster. You always have 
8

--- PAGE 16 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
control. If you don't think that you will get another thermal when 
you are down to about 600 feet, you look for a field and land in 
it. 
Like I did here to-day."
" How high can you get ? "
" Well, to-day, my highest was five thousand six hundred feet, 
but gliders have been up to twenty-five thousand feet."
" But that's about four miles high."
" I know, but it usually means a lot of blind flying in clouds."
" Could I glide ? " asked Brian.
" Of course. Why not ? 
People learn every day. You could 
too, if you wanted, Jane."
" Father, can we learn in the holidays ? "
" You try to do some work at school first, then we'll see."
The front-door bell rang just as they had finished coffee.
" That's Mark, I expect; he's coming to fetch me with the 
trailer."
They walked over to the front door, to find Mark and a friend 
standing on the step, while the maid eyed them suspiciously.
" They say they've come to fetch an aeryplane, Ma'am. We 
haven't got no aeryplanes here."
" That's all right, May," said their father. " Come in, you two. 
The remains are down in the field."
" You haven't broken it ? " said Mark.
" No, but it's all derigged and ready," grinned Bill.
" Thank goodness for that! Has he been behaving himself? " 
Mark asked their mother. " He hasn't been trying to make you 
take up gliding, or eating all your sugar, or anything ? "
" He's been very interesting, but I think the children are definitely 
converted. I suppose that means that we shall hear nothing but 
gliding for months now."
" Well, let's get the sailplane," said Brian impatiently.
B 
9

--- PAGE 17 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
" Well, thank you for a very welcome dinner, and I'm sorry I 
appeared so suddenly."
Brian led the way down the little cart track, the car and trailer 
following, bumping slowly over the ruts. The others walked 
behind, shouting directions. Reaching the field, they detached the 
trailer and pushed it through the gate. In the gathering dusk the 
machine, glinting dully, was fitted snugly inside. And as the last 
pale-green light faded from the dark horizon they departed, with 
a wave and a shout, to go home, driving into the night.
10

--- PAGE 18 ---
CHAPTER II
The First Flight
J. HE beginning of the summer holidays were black days for Brian 
and Jane. The effect of the wandering sailplane, and its happy- 
go-lucky pilot. Bill, had been simply to make them more than ever 
mad on flying, and their school work had suffered in consequence. 
The exam, results had produced their names almost at the bottom 
of the lists, and their reports had been, " Inattentive," or " A good 
brain, but no interest in her work," or merely " Lazy." They had 
both failed in Maths., but Jane had managed to get 90 per cent, in 
Literature, which was the only bright spot on a very dark horizon. 
Their father was furious with them, and even more so as they were 
continually worrying him to let them go to the Gliding Camp 
which was to be held at Branchester in the course of the next few 
weeks. Not unreasonably did he refuse, and it was only the quiet 
voice of their mother, who had said, " There is only one way to 
make them tired of it, and that is to make them sick of it," that 
made their father give the idea further consideration. He had 
never worked at school himself, and it was only when he had got 
right away from it all that he realised what a mistake he had made. 
He would try it on them before it was too late. 
So he wrote to 
the club, entering their names, by the next post.
Jane and Brian were so excited that they packed and repacked 
their things every day until the Friday, when they threw everything 
in and left by the 4.15 train, with the words of" Break all records " 
from their father, and " Don't do anything rash" from their 
mother, ringing in their ears.
ii

--- PAGE 19 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
Brian bounced up and down on the carriage seat, and Jane hit 
an old gentleman on the head with a chocolate aimed at her 
brother.
As they got nearer, the twins quietened down. It had been great 
fun thinking about it all, but now it was to come true, what would 
it be really like ? Their thoughts were mutual, and they knew it, 
but tried not to show anything.
The train slowed into Branchester; so, picking up their cases, 
they stepped soberly on to the platform.
A single-decker bus, which went within half a mile of the club 
grounds, was waiting in the station yard. They climbed in and 
rumbled off in a cloud of dust. It set them down at a little cross­ 
roads which was signposted to Pigly Parva, and the Gliding Club 
towards the west. Brian picked up the cases and Jane carried the 
raincoats, and they set off down the lane.
Coming round a bend, they saw the hill, and high above the hill, 
floating silently against the stately sky, were seven sailplanes. Brian 
dropped the cases and cartwheeled into the ditch, then picked them 
up and started running down the slope. Jane followed until they 
were both out of breath; then they sat down on the grass verge 
and watched the machines wheeling and circling.
A car roared past with eight feet of wire cable trailing and 
bouncing behind. It drew, squealing, to a standstill. A fair- 
headed man leaned out.
" Going to the club ? "
" Yes, we're joining the camp."
" Well, hop in then."
He drove at a furious rate down to the gates, and, turning in, 
roared up the short but steep hill to the clubhouse. They all got 
out, and their friend shouted at the back view of a broad-shouldered 
man wearing corduroy trousers.
12

--- PAGE 20 ---
car drew, squealing, to a standstill

--- PAGE 21 ---
cc
SILENT FLIGHT
Mac, here are two of your new death dicers." And giving them 
a smile he departed inside a trailer.
" Hang on to that tip a minute, will you ? " Brian looked round, 
and, seeing one untenanted wing tip, dropped the cases and 
grasped it.
" Can you hold this rope while I take up slack ? " said someone 
else to Jane. So she dropped the coats and held it up.
Mac arrived from the depths of the hangar and looked at the 
heap of coats and cases. A whistle made him look round. It was 
Brian from the distant wing tip.
" Hullo, so you're for the camp, are you? My name's Mac; 
I'm instructor here. I'm glad you've arrived all right; that makes 
the lot. 
Come on, I'll show you the bunkhouse."
Brian handed the tip over to the owner and followed Mac and 
Jane to the big army hut where the members slept.
They went first to a small room at the end, which Jane and 
another girl member would share. Jane put her case on the empty 
upper bed, and they went round to the main entrance and into a 
large, cool room with about twelve double-decker beds in it. Many 
had cases or clothes on them, but Brian found an empty one near 
a window, and left his case thereon.
" There won't be any training to-day, but if you are lucky the 
list on the two-seater may be nearly through and you could have 
a ride in that, if there is time before supper, which is at eight o'clock. 
Brown here will take you over to the launching place." He put 
his hand on Brown's shoulder. " Get these two a ride in the two- 
seater to-night if possible."
Brown was tall and thin, wearing a blue shirt and blue corduroy 
trousers; he had a cheerful smile and a small scar on his chin.
" You two camp members ? " he said.
" Er—yes; we've only just arrived. I'm longing to start."
'3

--- PAGE 22 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
" What gave you the idea of gliding ? "
" Well, Bill—we don't know his other name—landed in one of 
our fields about two months ago, and, well, we've always been keen 
on flying, but this seemed too good to be true."
"What! Bill with the white Kite? You must be the people 
who gave him such a good dinner. Did he eat all your sugar ? "
" No, but he had a white machine."
" Well, he's two-seatering now. He'll be taking you up. Does 
he know you are coming ? "
" Not unless he's heard from Mac."
" Oh, Mac never tells anybody anything. Still, here you are; 
that's the beautiful beast coming in now."
A huge machine with swept-back wings slipped steeply in over the 
hedge, and landed gently a few yards away, right by the launching 
point. Bill and his passenger got out.
" Well, that's all for to-day, thank you," he said, stretching.
" I think you're wrong, Bill, old boy. Here are two more for 
you," shouted Brown. Bill turned, frowning, and looked towards 
them.
" Oh, hello. Have you really joined ? 
Good for you. Hop in, 
I'll take you up; you won't ask silly questions like some of the others."
They both walked forward, each trying surreptitiously to get in 
first. Jane glared at Brian, who said,
" In you get, Jane, but I'll get my Silver G first."
Bill climbed in again and did up their straps. The winch cable 
had been brought from the other side of the field, and was hooked 
into the quick release just under the nose of the sailplane.
" O.K., we're ready. One flag," shouted Bill.
Brown was standing ready to run on one wing tip, and 
someone else was waving a yellow flag up and down to the right 
of them. 
14

--- PAGE 23 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
The winch started slowly winding in the cable on a drum, until 
it became taut, making the machine rock gently on its skid. Then 
it started to move forward.
" Two flags," roared Bill.
The big machine ran forward a few yards until it became airborne. 
Then suddenly the earth fell sharply away underneath them, leaving 
only the blue sky ahead—the whistling air flowed past the wings, 
shrieked dully round the struts. Jane held on to the cockpit side 
and glanced at Bill, who was holding the stick back with his right 
hand and grasping a little ring on the instrument board with his left.
It was like going for a ride in a tipped-back arm-chair.
As they rose higher, Bill eased her down a little, and a flattened 
strip of earth became visible under the nose. After a few seconds 
he pulled the release ring, and there was a click as the cable fell 
away. Banking gently the pilot brought her round on an even turn.
" I'm afraid there won't be much lift now; it's getting rather late, 
and the wind's slacked off a lot. Still, we'll see what can be done."
They flew along parallel to and above the ridge, floating on the 
gently rising air, which felt alive and buoyant. Everything was 
quiet save for the soft swish of the cool, fresh breeze, which blew 
Jane's hair back from her face. They flew quietly up and down the 
ridge several times, Bill enjoying the view, and Jane thrilled with 
her first flight.
" We must go down soon if your brother wants to fly to-night; 
there won't be any lift left soon."
" I suppose we'd better, then; he'd be furious if I'd been up and 
he hadn't."
" O.K. Here we go then."
Bill flew out from the hill and turned in over the road. Away 
from the lift they were sinking fast, and soon, helped by a slight 
sideslip, floating along just above the ground. The long grass
15

--- PAGE 24 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
brushed the skid, then two gentle bumps on the hard, rough earth, 
and they were sitting at rest, almost in position for the next launch.
Brian ran up. " How did you like it ? " he asked. " It looks 
grand; hurry up and get out. I want my turn too."
" All right, don't be impatient. You won't want to get out once 
you've been up; it's absolutely marvellous."
Brian took Jane's place, and the cable was hooked in again. 
The winch engine roared in the distance, and they were off, climbing 
steeply.
Bill released the cable and flew along the hill; the lift was slowly 
subsiding, and they found great difficulty in keeping up in the air. 
Bill was working hard, flying the big machine as near into the hill as 
he dare, turning steeply right in the big bowl at the end of the beat, 
and scraping back just above the ridge. Brian was enjoying himself, 
waving and shouting at sightseers standing on the top of the hill, 
almost beside them, and looking down the long wing into the gulleys 
as they turned. They stuck it for twelve minutes, and then heard 
the supper bell ring distantly. Bill gave a hearty cheer and the 
same sort of sideslip, and within a minute they had landed outside 
the clubhouse. 
Someone walked over with a sandbag. They 
turned the machine wing into wind and left the sandbag on the 
tip. Then went into the clubhouse, from where there issued the 
savoury smell of fried eggs and bacon.
16

--- PAGE 25 ---
CHAPTER III
Hoppery and Crashery
JL HE next morning, the slumberers in the bunkhouse were 
awakened at the early hour of six with brilliant sunshine streaming 
in at the window, and the song of many larks. Being very keen 
to start, they hastily got up and had every machine out of the hangar 
by seven-thirty. The new camp members were supplemented by 
several old hands, and soon learnt how to handle machines on the 
ground, without pushing holes in the fabric. The next half-hour 
was occupied by the experienced members giving the gliders their 
daily airworthiness inspection, and signing for them in the book. 
Others were at the back of the hangar, starting up the old retrieving 
cars. 
By eight o'clock everything was ready on the primary slopes, 
so they all trooped in to a large breakfast.
The instructor arrived soon afterwards, so swallowing down the 
last few hard crumbs of toast, the new members went out on to the 
sunlit field. Only the old hands, viewing the light north-east wind 
with distaste, stayed on, eating and talking.
Arriving at the far side, Mac started telling his charges the whys 
and wherefores of this new sport.
" These machines, Daglings, are not very efficient, as you can 
see," he started. " But they are especially designed like this, so 
that you will not get into any difficulties by being blown into the 
wrong field, or floating into the clubhouse. They have not got any 
cockpit, so that if you do go and break it, you won't get hurt. Also 
they are cheap to repair, which is a very important point.
" These control surfaces on the wings are called ailerons.
'7

--- PAGE 26 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
These give you lateral control, or bank. You see, one goes up as 
the other goes down. Now, the airflow pressing on the one that 
rises above the wing makes the wing go down, and the airflow 
against the down-going aileron makes that wing go up, and so the 
machine tips on one side.
" Next, there is the rudder, which is opposite to the handlebars 
of a bicycle, but simpler; right foot for right rudder, and right turn. 
And left foot for left rudder. In a turn, you use both rudder and 
bank together. If you don't bank, you skid out; and if you don't 
use rudder, then you slip inwards. Now last, but most important 
of all, the elevator, which as its name suggests, is for climb, and 
dive. On these machines, the elevator is the most sensitive of the 
three controls, so you must be very gentle with it. To lift the nose, 
and so climb, pull the stick slightly back; the elevator goes up and 
so presses the tail down, which lifts the nose. To dive, ease the 
stick forward, and the elevator goes down, and so does the nose. 
Above all, never be rough with the controls; the gentler the better.
" Now, Baker, you sit on the seat here, and put your feet on the 
rudder bar, right. Now hold the stick, so that the elevators are 
straight out behind the tailplane. That is the position for normal 
level flight, but, to begin with, we will only do slides without leaving 
the ground, so the stick must be kept forward.
" So remember, stick left and right to keep the wings level, 
forwards for dive, a little back to slow up. And rudder left and 
right for direction. The rest of you get the bungy rope out, and 
I'll do a test hop to show you what it is like. Right, hook the ring 
in the middle of the bungy on to the open hook on the nose, and 
take the two ends out in front of the machine, making about a thirty 
degree Vee. Baker, you hold the wing tip level. Jane and Peters, 
you hold back on the tailbooms, at the top, please. The rest of 
you go and pull, four a side on the rope. I shall shout' Walk,' and 
18

--- PAGE 27 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
the bungy crew walk forward. 
c Run/ and run as fast as you can, 
and go on running until the ring drops off. Then, ' Let go,' and 
you two on the tail, just stop holding back. O.K. ? "
" Walk—Run " came almost immediately. The crew, heads 
down, were putting their best into this everyday test hop of the 
instructor.
" Let go." And Jane and Peters, who had been digging their 
heels into the ground to get a good grip, released the tail. The 
primary shot forward, rising to about twenty-five feet from the 
power of the launch, then, settling into a steady glide, floated 
gently to earth. The crew stopped running and began to haul 
the bungy back to the starting-place. 
Roberts, another camp 
member, with Brian on the running board, went to fetch the machine 
back, with the rattling retrieving car.
In turn, they all had slides, gentle launches which took them 
about twenty yards without leaving the ground. Some were quite 
straight and good, others just skated along on a wing tip.
Three days later, most of them were on to strong hops lasting 
about ten seconds, from a slightly steeper slope. Both Jane and 
Brian were among these advanced hoppers, egged on by the 
competitive feeling between them.
It was on this afternoon that Brian broke the primary; he described 
it as a gust under his tail, but everyone else said that they had heard 
that tale before. He had just been launched off the mantelshelf slope, 
and finding himself higher than he'd ever been before, about thirty 
feet up, he dived and followed the slope down until he came to the 
familiar nearness of the ground, then realised that he was going 
much too fast, so pulled the nose up, then decided he was going 
too slowly; but it was too late, he had it stalled, and from eight 
feet the Dagling dropped like a stone. Crump! It landed heavily 
on a tip and the front part of the skid. The landing wires broke,
19

--- PAGE 28 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
and the wings drooped like a bedraggled bird; there was also some 
fabric torn on the wing. Brian got off and surveyed the cock-eyed 
machine. The others walked up, Jane grinning broadly, Mac 
saying nothing, but with an amused, questioning look on his face. 
And the others took it as the best joke for a long time until Mac 
told them that they would all have to dismantle the machine and 
carry it to the workshop before they could fly again. But they set 
to it with a will, and were hopping again before tea-time.
They all slowly improved as they discovered that it was not 
necessary to move the controls at all violently, and, anyway, the 
Dagling seemed to fly itself much better than they could.
The camp also began to string out according to ability, and Mac 
had said that on the following day five members could try for their 
A certificates, weather permitting.
They were lucky, for the next day was almost ideal; a very light 
breeze was blowing on to the hill, with a thin sheet of high cloud 
dulling the sun.
The five each had a long hop off the mantelshelf, and then took 
the primary to the top of the hill. Brian was first to fly down, and 
Mac told him that it would feel very much higher than usual, and 
to resist the temptation of following the contours down.
"Just keep a gentle summer breeze on your face, and you'll be 
quite all right. And don't try to stretch the glide; it's quite easy 
to get your thirty seconds to-day."
The crew stretched out the bungy, and he was off. It was a 
good launch and took him well clear of the hill. But it did feel 
high, and as Brian took a quick glance down between his legs, the 
earth seemed very far away, and he rather longed to get back to 
it. Down went the nose, the wind rushed past his ears and whined 
in the wires. The ground came up to meet him; this was better, 
more what he was used to. 
He flattened out and made quite a 
20

--- PAGE 29 ---
-^
the Ailerons " (see page 17)

--- PAGE 30 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
neat landing. But there was no reassuring cheer from the top of 
the hill. Through going too fast he had landed short of the half- 
minute. The old car came and fetched him, and Baker said: 
" Better luck next time, I shall probably do the same." But Brian 
was annoyed, and more so when Jane made a very even flight of 
thirty-three seconds.
The other four, through watching Brian's faults, and resisting 
the temptation to dive, all got their A's easily. Later in the 
afternoon, when his turn came round again, he made the longest 
flight of the day, forty-one seconds, and felt better.
Three days later, four of them had their B certificates, for which 
they had to do two forty-five-second flights, and one of a minute 
duration with left and right turns.
The turns were the difficult part, and the amount of bank to go 
with a certain degree of rudder had to be discovered by experience, 
and some of them found a tendency to get very slow on a right turn, 
due to the fact that they unconsciously pulled the stick towards them 
when putting on right bank.
However, they were slowly improving, and the weather remained 
almost ideal. Would it be possible for them to get the C Soaring 
Certificate at the camp ? There were three days more to go, and 
Mac had promised them that if they were good they could do 
ground hops on the Nacelle Dagling—a primary with a cockpit 
built around the pilot to improve the streamlining—that evening, 
and do practice descents the next day.
They all liked the Nacelle—the controls were more evenly 
balanced, and there was no draught to whistle up the trouser legs. 
It also had a flatter glide and care had to be taken not to overshoot 
the landing-ground into the far hedge of the car park.
The four of them, Brian, Jane, Baker, and Michael Peters, made 
descents from the hill-top for the whole day, and in great style, so
21

--- PAGE 31 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
in the evening Mac told them that if their heads hadn't burst by 
the next good west wind, they could try for the C.
At last they would be able to soar on the wind, and wander 
across the country with the clouds. They would really be able to 
fly. 
How they wanted that west wind!
22

--- PAGE 32 ---
CHAPTER IV
Cross-countries and Retrieving
Parties
JL HE next day, Saturday, was hot and calm, so that there was 
no chance of the great flight. But as crowds of members had 
turned up to try to catch thermals, there was plenty of work to do, 
rigging private machines, helping to launch and retrieve, and picking 
up tips from the experienced pilots. 
Bill was one of the first to be 
ready with his white Kirby Kite, and they plied him with questions 
on the way to the launching point. This was a different launch from 
the catapult bungy starts that they had been used to. It was called 
a winch launch, the same as they had had on their first two-seater 
ride. The winch was placed on the windward side of the field, and 
about 2,000 feet of cable was paid out right across the field and 
hooked in the nose quick release of a sailplane facing into wind 
on the leeward side.
Bill climbed in with his parachute on and did up the straps. 
The streamline cockpit cover was fitted on and sandwiches wedged 
into a corner. The map was pushed down by his left hand, and 
Brian got ready to run on the wing tip.
" Where are you going ? "
Bill grinned. 
" I haven't the vaguest idea," he said.
Jane gave the signals to the winch driver with the yellow flags. 
One for "Take up slack." The cable rustled across the grass, 
grumbled in the release hook as it became taut. The Kite rocked 
on her skid, and then moved slowly over the ground.
23

--- PAGE 33 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
" Two flags," shouted Bill.
Jane hurriedly waved both flags, and the winch engine speeded 
up with a distant roar. The machine left the ground, and, with the 
stick almost hard back, swept steeply upward in a graceful arc, the 
sun glittering on the polished paint. About 700 feet up the cable 
dropped, and the white bird passed silently overhead in a gentle turn.
" Look, I think he's caught a thermal," said Jane as the Kite 
began to circle above the next field.
They were both rather hazy as to the nature and use of a thermal 
—they knew you circled in them and went up, and Bill had said 
something about getting them over cornfields and villages. It was 
a column of rising hot air caused by the irregular heating of the 
earth on sunny days that really caused them. But it looked like 
magic to Jane and Brian.
They looked at the Kite again, shading their eyes from the sun. 
At first they were unable to find it, the sky was empty save for a 
hovering hawk waiting for its prey. Then they saw it, very high, 
a miniature bird immovable against the vast expanse of brilliant 
blue, a transparent ghost that disappeared even as they looked. 
It's lovely! " said Jane.
Hey, come and flag for me," a voice cried. They woke from 
a single dream; there were more people to get away, a car had 
brought the cable back, and another machine was ready to depart 
into the unknown.
It was a Grunau Baby II, like the club sailplanes. It didn't 
have the sleek lines of the Kite, but looked strong and workmanlike.
Two flags, a grin, and up he went, climbing steeply to get the 
maximum height from the launch.
Releasing, he turned by the clubhouse and started circling.
" There might be something there," said a voice at their elbow. 
For a few turns he held it, then slowly lost height. 
24
cc 
«c

--- PAGE 34 ---
.7*%
'- 
j^^^^^^^s^^^r^n"*^-^>''" M" 
'- ~-*-'-'• ..--.- -•- 
'- -f "'pn^V-^'i - 
~ 
-""'• <-"'^.'* :: - ^'^
-- -..^^^P^^^^PS^ ' 
' 
""•'.."" ~- 7 - 
. 
r- 
<>••••.,- 
•--;^i;^^.-'r,-';: '::'':-^-y^^
^A^ ground^ and swept steeply upward

--- PAGE 35 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
"Just too late, he's fallen out of the bottom of that one," 
the voice went on, " I doubt if he will get anything this flip
now."
He was right, as a few seconds later the G.B. swished through the 
long grass and came to rest a few yards away. They went over to 
drag the machine back to the launching point, and found the 
disappointed pilot eating his sandwiches.
The sun was hot and a few little detached cumuli lazed slowly 
far overhead, showing the existence of strong thermal lift. It was 
lunch-time, but much too warm to walk right back to the clubhouse, 
so they ate a couple of borrowed apples and lay and sunbathed, 
only getting up to launch off various machines that arrived with 
their parachuted and bemapped pilots.
They had flagged off nine sailplanes up till now. Five had missed 
thermals and were waiting to try their luck again. The rest had 
disappeared. Where, no one knew, or how far. Some may have 
reached the coast nearly a hundred miles distant. Some might at 
this very moment be gently settling in a distant field, to smell the 
hay and the heavily scented earth, still exhilarated with their silent 
passage through the uncharted blue.
They would sit, for a few minutes after landing, the sun hot on 
their heads, the stick slack in their hands, until awakened into 
reality again by the sound of voices, to find the faithful sailplane 
surrounded by a crowd of curious onlookers who had appeared from 
nowhere in the space of a few seconds.
There was still no news of Bill.
By half-past two a slight breeze had sprung up. It was blowing 
on to the hill and bringing with it grand, dazzling white cumuli 
which wandered across the sky in stately peace.
They sent up more sailplanes, some of them flown by people they
had never seen before, but who treated them as though they had
c 
25

--- PAGE 36 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
been members all their lives, and were the most experienced pilots 
instead of a couple of enthusiastic hoppers.
One machine was flown by a girl; it was a pretty machine, called 
a Rhonsperber. It caught a thermal soon after the launch, and, 
still circling evenly, passed beyond the hill and away, making Jane 
feel very envious.
Three or four machines staying up in the gentle hill lift were 
trying to catch clouds. As a phantom mountain rode across the 
sky towards the hill, Brian and Jane, lying on their backs, would 
watch a sailplane, almost transparent against the heavy blue, fly 
out from the hill towards it, then slowly grow smaller and, wheeling 
as a gull, sail away beyond the hill in company with its ghostly 
benefactor.
They longed to see the land behind the hill, to soar far above the 
ridge alone, to harness the wind, the sun, and their own skill to fly high 
over the expanse of fields and villages which lay to the east, watching 
the shadow of their own protective cloud drift slowly over the land. 
Others were doing this now, this minute. Some with the thrill of 
the first cross-country. Others, more experienced, working their 
way across wind to where they expected better weather conditions 
or a greater distance before reaching the coast.
Another machine was being towed out to the start. It was bigger 
than the others with a heavily tapered wing and clean lines, the 
smooth varnished wood shining in the afternoon sun. They got up 
to turn it into wind and help in the pilot.
" Gosh, this is a beauty! It's much the best so far. What is it? "
" I think it is called a Rhonadler," said Jane. " I should love 
to fly it."
" You would probably break it," said Brian hardly.
The pilot had fixed himself into the tiny cockpit, and as there 
was not much room for him to move his arms about, Jane did up 
26

--- PAGE 37 ---
cc 
cc
SILENT FLIGHT
his safety straps. There was more tucking in of maps and sand­ 
wiches, then the cockpit lid was fitted on, and the cable ring fixed in 
the release, tested, and rattled to make certain that it would not 
jam at the top of the launch. Brian gave one flag. 
Where are you going ? " Jane asked again. 
I thought I'd have a crack at a return flight to Maidenhead, 
but I shall probably land on the golf course behind the hill. The 
bunkers are—— Two flags."
The Rhonadler bumped slightly on the hard ground and, pulling 
up at a steep angle, the great bird rode slowly to the top. Then 
turned and flew along the hill.
" She is awfully slow."
" No, I think it's only because she's so big; but isn't she a beauty ? 
I'm going to own her one day."
" If he is a sensible man he won't sell. I wouldn't—a beauty 
like that."
Jane did not answer; she just watched a massive snow cloud pass 
over the hill with the graceful outline of the Adler silhouetted 
against it.
The strong lift began to die slowly away with the sun, and the 
Adler was the last to be able to leave the site. About six-thirty 
the monumental cumulus had given way to a sky, clear, save for 
some wispy cirrus threads at immense height.
They wandered over to the hangar and helped derig some of 
the less fortunate pilots' machines.
" It must be great fun to live in your trailer," said Brian as they 
stowed the last one away.
They went into the club. Someone had just rung through from 
Hornchurch. He had been given a huge tea by the farmer in 
whose field he had landed, and would his partner go and fetch 
him, please ? He was in the field next to the cemetery. His
27

--- PAGE 38 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
partner laughed and, calling a friend to come and help, went out, 
a coat in one hand and three bars of chocolate in the other. Their 
car rumbled off down the road.
Two others had already telephoned, and their friends had left to 
retrieve them. Their distances were only nine and twenty-one miles, 
not even enough for the Silver G distance test.
There were still seven more machines to report. The club was 
crowded with people, eating, waiting for the telephone, and talking 
over the day's flying, in a language that neither Brian nor Jane yet 
fully understood. Most of the trailers were already attached to 
the cars. People had on overcoats. Everything and everybody 
was waiting, laughing and talking, but waiting. Where were the 
seven ? How far had they gone ? Over a hundred miles, and 
there wasn't going to be much sleep for anybody that night. There 
probably wouldn't be, anyway, for those staying in the club. A 
car in second gear coming up the hill, the crunch of gravel, a flash 
of headlights across the bunkhouse window, voices and the slamming 
of car doors, then dozing off until the same performance was re­ 
peated about an hour later.
To-morrow there would be late breakfast and everybody talking 
at once. One by one more people left. They could be heard 
talking and laughing outside, then the car engine roared into life, 
and faded away down the road. Others had gone to bed.
It was getting late, and there was still no news of Bill or the owner 
of the Adler. Jane and three others were playing bridge. Brian 
was just sitting, half-asleep, stroking the club cat. Conversation had 
died, the monotonous calling of the bridge players and Whiskey's 
loud purring were the only sounds that broke the stillness of the 
warm evening.
The telephone bell jangled, jarring harshly into the quietness. 
Everyone jumped up, then sat down again. 
28

--- PAGE 39 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
" Three spades. Answer the 'phone someone, I expect it's Bill."
The only someone left was Brian, so, holding the cat under his 
arm, he walked over to the telephone.
" Hullo. Hullo, Bill. Why didn't you ring before, and where 
are you ? Eastbourne ? Why did you take so long ? Where ? 
Who's where ? Oh, there; no. Jack! On the cliff near the ruined 
tower. O.K., we'll come right away."
He turned round; they were all standing looking at him, some with 
coats already on.
" Bill and Jack, with the Adler, are both at Eastbourne. Bill 
thermalled via every town in the south of England as far as I can 
see, and Jack found a north wind at three thousand feet and 
went straight there under clouds. Can we come and help fetch 
them ? "
" Yes, do, then I can get to bed early for a change," said one of 
the bridge players.
So Bradwell, Bill's friend, and a tall fair man with a slight stoop 
and a seaman's sweater, called Dick Byrd, bought some chocolate, 
and went out with Brian and Jane.
It was dusk, and very warm and still. The trailers were fixed 
to the cars and loomed dark against the sky. Brian went with 
Bradwell in Bill's open Bentley, and Jane followed with Byrd in 
his Ford V8 two-seater.
Engines were running, the Bentley with a slow heavy throb, and 
the big Ford with the powerful quiet of its breed. After a few delays 
they were off. The lights clicked on and they ran down the slope 
on to the road to London, the Bentley leading.
They spoke hardly at all, as they drove fast down the bypass, 
the windscreen flat, and the cool evening air playing with their 
hair. Brian looked back when he thought about it to see if the 
Ford was still following. They ate some chocolate and idly watched
29

--- PAGE 40 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
the moths and insects dance madly their dance of death into the 
headlights.
" We are not supposed to do more than thirty miles per hour 
with a trailer/ 5 said Brad well as the needle crept up to sixty-five.
They ran through London at eleven o'clock. The roads were still 
busy, but the pavements empty. In all the cars and taxis they 
could see the gleam of white shirts and women's evening dresses. 
Brian wondered what sort of a party or show they had been to, and 
wondered what they thought when they saw the big green Bentley 
with two windswept youths in the front seat, and the mysterious 
trailer on the back, and then the Ford, the same, behind them. 
He also wondered what his family would think if they could see 
him now.
The traffic had slowed them up a great deal, and they were glad 
to get out on to the wide straight road, which was signposted in 
reflector letters, " To the Coast."
Bradwell drove fast and well, Brian glanced back at the Ford 
rounding a bend and waved to Jane.
They drove on in silence. The moon was just rising over the 
flat fields of Kent, a big yellow moon, rising out of the shadowy 
streamers of mist that crept silently over the landscape.
" It's been a terrific day," said Bradwell; " it's very seldom we're 
as lucky as that at the week-end. We've never had so many 
machines go away before."
They ran through two large towns and several small villages, the 
noise of the cars reverberating in the narrow cottage-lined streets. 
Near Eastbourne they left the main road and rattled over a roughly 
made sunken lane towards the dark outline of the ruined tower and 
the sea. It seemed to go on between high tamarisk hedges for miles, 
and to be completely without finish, until they went round a bend, 
and suddenly out on to the grass of the cliff-top, where they stopped.
3°

--- PAGE 41 ---
allowed to fly the Falcon

--- PAGE 42 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
The sea, glittering and gilded by the moon, stretched out to a distant 
horizon, and grumbled gently on the pebbles far underneath them. 
The sky was clear and dark, and thrift growing among the short 
turf rustled dryly in the cool breeze. A little dull orange light 
winked at them from far out to sea.
" It's a wonderful night, but I wish I knew where they are," said 
Bradwell, being practical.
The Ford had drawn up beside them and Byrd was lighting a 
cigarette, which smelt like incense in the fresh salt air. Jane was 
sitting up on the back of the seat, quietly surveying the scene.
" What's that over there ? " she said, indicating a gleam of light 
pointing to the sky in the next field.
" It's them. That's the moon shining on the Adler's wing. 
Come on."
They slid down into their seats and bumped slowly over the grass. 
As they got near they could make out the outline of the Adler. 
One wing reared dark, like a spear, to the sky.
" Bill. Hullo there," Brad shouted. There was no answer. 
They stopped beside the Adler and the derigged carcase of the 
white Kite.
" Funny, leaving the machines like this; I wonder where they've 
gone ? I suppose it's no good looking for them; we'll only lose 
ourselves. They are probably making whoopee at the house of one 
of Jack's friends. He used to live near here."
Brian looked at his watch. It was two-twenty, and would soon 
be light. They wandered over to the remains of a haystack and 
sat down. There was a loud yell, and two dark shapes rose up 
from the pile.
66 You take all night to get here, and then wake us up by jumping 
on us; that's the sort of friends we've got." Bill looked at Jack, 
who nodded in approval.

--- PAGE 43 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
Bradwell said, " You had better remove some of that straw; you 
look like a couple of scarecrows."
" Well, thanks a lot for coming. Isn't it a marvellous night ? 
You know, parachutes and hay make an extremely comfortable 
bed. Hullo, Brian. Hullo, Jane, you too; it's frightfully nice of 
you to come all this way."
They walked over and started to derig the Adler.
" I'm sorry we couldn't do this before you came," said Jack, 
" but it takes at least five people to lift the wing off and on; that's 
its disadvantage—its only one."
It was three-thirty before they were ready to leave for home. A 
cobweb of very high cloud had spread like a spectre over the dark 
sky, and the haloed moon was peering dully through it. The air 
had become cold and everybody was very sleepy.
'' What you wanted to come all this way for I don't know,'' said Brad.
" Well, you would have," was Bill's retort as they banged on the 
trailer door.
Oh, shut up.
Same to you. :
I won't fetch you again. 1
" Then you won't fly my machine."
" I'm tired."
" So am I."
" Let's have breakfast at Lyons on the way through London."
" I'd rather have a bath."
" Well, there is the sea."
They climbed in the Bentley, backed it up to the trailer, and got 
out to hitch on the tow bar, but it was the wrong end, so, 
glaring fiercely at each other, they got into the car again and roared 
round the trailer to the other end in bottom gear, making as much 
noise as possible.
32
" Oh, shut up." 
" Same to you."

--- PAGE 44 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
When it was hooked on, they turned round carefully, remembering 
the ditches, took a last glance at the cold grey sea, and plunged 
into the dark, narrow lane.
Brian thoroughly enjoyed the ride back; he was no longer sleepy, 
but was excited and very happy. Here he was, in a powerful open 
car, with his friends, two brilliant pilots, one asleep beside him, 
towing the big narrow trailer, which held the beautiful white sail­ 
plane, back home at four o'clock in the morning through a quiet 
empty England, with the expectant sky pink and clear before the 
sun.
He wondered if Jane was thinking the same.
They drove through London. A different London from what they 
were used to—a quiet, empty London with washed and shining 
streets. The only occupants, the cats that would dash across the 
road and disappear over a wall just as suddenly.
It was quite light now, and the sun, low and bright, dazzled Brian 
as it flickered on the steering wheel and lowered windscreen.
Brad was still asleep.
They drove back up the bypass in the brightening daylight, while 
formations of duck flew low overhead, and milkcarts rattled along 
on the morning round. They came to the familiar town and the 
two cars turned left down the lane towards the club.
The few passers-by looked disparagingly at them, as if to say, 
" These mad flyers; do they ever lead a normal life ? "
As they turned through the entrance gates, Brian felt suddenly 
very tired. There was nothing more to do. It was six-thirty a.m., 
the machines were retrieved, ready again to soar high among the 
lonely spirits of the sky, to fly far across the country to distant villages 
or the sea, only to be retrieved again. Brian laughed, and putting 
his arm on Jane's shoulder, the two of them wandered slowly off 
to bed.
33

--- PAGE 45 ---
CHAPTER V
G Stands for Soaring
'<rr
JL HE wind's west, it's west; come on, you chaps."
" Oh, go away, it's too early, it's only—— What, a west wind ? 
Why didn't you say so to begin with ? "
A turmoil arose in the bunkhouse, people grabbing trousers and 
toothbrushes and running for the wash-room. The old hands peered 
out from under the blankets.
" H'm, it should be good about eleven o'clock when the thermals 
get going," they grunted, turning over.
After breakfast Mac gathered the five eligibles together on the
hill-top.
" Well, I think you can try for your C's to-day." He smiled.
" Now, look at the hill. When you are launched, turn along to 
the right; then, when you reach the bump in the hill just before 
the bowl, do a left-hand turn, not going too slow, and fly back along 
the beat, turning again over the launching place. Don't go beyond 
either of these two points, and don't get too far behind the hill, as 
there is a downdraught there, which will plant you on the golf course.
" If you fly too far out from the hill, you will sink down to the 
bottom and have to land. But, above all, do not try to stay up 
by pulling the stick back. If you see you are sinking below the top, 
come and land and try again later. If you try to soar by stretching 
the glide, you will come down very quickly indeed.
" All right, Jane; ladies first; you try."
Jane got into the Nacelle and did up the straps. The bungy crew 
got ready.
34

--- PAGE 46 ---
Ml? -^i^;^-' 'V.":' - s-:
" 
"
cc
'^^ broken my spine "
38)

--- PAGE 47 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
Mac was at the wing tip. " O.K. ? " he called. " I'll wave from 
here with my handkerchief. If it is held in my right hand, you are 
flying too far away from the hill. If it is in my left, you are too 
far over the path. When I wave it above my heatf, it is time to 
come down. Understand ? Well, good luck."
The bungy was stretched out, and away she went. Clear of the 
hill the Nacelle turned, and started its beat along the ridge.
" It's not staying up very well," said Brian anxiously.
" No, she's flying a bit far out from the hill," said Mac. " Still, 
it's a better fault than being too far over."
The Nacelle turned. It was a nice, even turn, but rather large, 
and in making it Jane flew right out of the lift. She banked in 
towards the hill again, but it was too late, she was below the top. 
The Nacelle turned away out over the field in a wide sweep as it 
approached in to land.
" Well, I'm glad she's sensible about it, anyway," said Mac. 
" But now, there is no excuse. You all know what to avoid, and 
Jane can try again when you all land—"if you don't break it."
The pulley on the hill-top, round which the endless rope of the 
pull-up winch ran, rattled as the rope trundled round, and soon 
Jane's curly head appeared over the crest, with the Nacelle.
She was feeling annoyed with herself and would not speak to 
anybody.
Michael Peters was the next away, and made a very smooth 
flight of fifteen minutes, which made Jane more annoyed than ever. 
Baker and Campbell, a non-camp member, also made good flights 
without incident, but Brian's flight was rather hectic. Remembering 
Jane's fault, he was determined not to do the same, so erred the 
other way and flew too much over the path.
Mac was looking grim, waving his left arm furiously. Suddenly 
Brian found himself well and truly over the golf course at the top,
35

--- PAGE 48 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
and sinking like a brick. He turned violently, diving for the edge 
but making no progress against the wind. He got lower and lower, 
and was just about to hit the edge of the hill with a resounding 
crack, when a sharp gust just lifted him up and over. Out in front 
again, the lift was very strong, and he was able to soar once more, 
flying up and down very carefully while he recovered from the fright 
he had given himself. He landed in one piece after sixteen minutes.
He brought the machine to the top once more amid black looks 
from Mac and Jane, and wide grins from the others.
Jane got in to try again, and was just about to be launched when 
there was a shout from the crest and a ginger head and freckled 
face rose up over the top.
" Mac, can I try for my C ? " it shouted.
" Oh, is that you, Leather ? Yes, I think you might, it's about 
time you got it. But don't break the Nacelle again. Jane will 
bring it up for you."
Leather was very out of breath and red in the face. He smiled 
at Jane as he went to hold on to the tail. She hadn't seen him 
before, but gathered that he was quite a well-known figure by all 
the waves and shouts he received.
Jane was determined to make a good flight, and was still a little 
cross with herself. The lift was better now, and she had profited 
by watching the others, consequently making quite a nice flight. It 
was a wonderful feeling to be actually floating along, supported 
entirely by the wind, and her own hands. She felt so happy and 
confident after twelve minutes that she dived down at the launching 
crew, pulling up into the lift again with a steep climb. Two more 
beats and she saw that Mac was waving his handkerchief above his 
head. 
So away from the lift for the landing. In over the linches, 
sinking fast across the little hollow before the hangar ridge; stick 
back a bit—no, too much, easy now, flatten out. A slight bumping,
36

--- PAGE 49 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
and the Nacelle sat lightly on the grass. Jane took the machine 
to the top again, feeling pleased with herself, and whistling 
loudly.
The other four were delighted that Jane had got her C, but Mac 
suggested that it might be a good idea not to try to decapitate 
her crew, as they might not appreciate it, for Mac himself had gone 
flat when Jane dived on them.
Leather got in, smiling all over his freckles, and was launched 
off with a shout of agony when the skid hit a bump. Everyone 
laughed, but Mac looked serious.
" This is the fifth time that he's tried; I hope he doesn't break it. 
He does such crazy things."
The Nacelle sailed away down the beat, diving and climbing as 
Leather decided that he was going too fast or too slow. At the end, 
the nose went down and the machine screamed round in a whistle 
of wires. Up again over the launching point, still pitching with 
uncertainty. A large skidding turn and away again.
Mac was still serious. " He'll never be able to fly," he muttered. 
" I wish he'd give it up. Still, he can't come to much harm in 
the Nacelle."
Leather was feeling ambitious; he had done two beats and was 
still in the air—he would go a bit farther and see what it was like. 
Nearly into the bowl, and he saw he was being drifted backwards. 
Full rudder and bank to turn quickly back along the beat. The 
machine gathered a lot of speed and whistled round in a diving 
turn. He then got tied up with the controls and put on full opposite 
rudder to come out, not realising that when banked beyond an angle 
of forty-five degrees the tail controls changed places—the elevator 
becoming the rudder, and the rudder the elevator.
With the controls in this position he just came swiftly to earth in 
a perfect text-book sideslip. The wing hit the ground with a crunch,
37

--- PAGE 50 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
and the whole machine turned over on its back, shedding bits of 
plywood in all directions.
Mac, whose expression had to be seen to be believed, and the 
five new C pilots walked and ran down the steep slope and broke 
a way through the crowd of hikers and spectators.
Leather was lying on his back beside the wreck.
" I'm dying," he said as they approached. Mac gave Brian a 
sidelong glance.
" That means he's O.K." he whispered. 
" I've heard that one 
before."
Mac felt Leather all over. He had a small scratch on one eye­ 
brow, so Mac got out his iodine pencil and put a drop on it. Leather 
sat up immediately and shouted.
" I think I have broken my spine," he added.
Mac helped him to his feet " No, I think you are all right in that 
respect, but you'll probably have to stand up to breakfast to-morrow."
Various club members were dismantling the bits, and carrying them 
over to the workshop. Leather was taken to a doctor just in case, 
which was very annoying, as he wanted to tell everybody his version of 
the story before they formulated any ideas of their own. He was still 
more annoyed when the doctor could find nothing wrong with him.
The other five, however, got congratulations all round and were 
feeling exceedingly pleased with life. They had actually got their 
C's in the fortnight's camp, which was a very rare occurrence. 
But they had been lucky with the weather. Smooth and easy for 
the first ten days, and westerly winds for the last three days, with 
a first-class C day to finish up with.
It had been a marvellous fortnight, the best they had ever spent, 
and as the twins departed for home with their overfilled suitcases, 
their last words were, " See you next week-end." Branchester was 
that sort of place.
38

--- PAGE 51 ---
CHAPTER VI
Autumn and the First Winch Launch
V V OULDN'T it be fun if we could have a machine of our own ? " 
said Brian, longingly.
" It would be lovely! What do you think is the best sort to get ? "
" They're awfully expensive; we haven't nearly got enough 
money, not even between us."
66 There is something called an Hi 7, which you can buy and build 
yourself for about thirty pounds," Jane suggested.
" Yes, but we haven't even got three pounds, let alone thirty 
pounds."
" Here's Father; let's ask him."
" You ask, Jane; you're a girl."
" Father, can we have a sailplane, please ? It works out cheaper 
in the long run, and it means that you can get the Silver C, which is 
practically impossible on club machines, and we could buy the parts 
for not much money and build it ourselves."
" And it's very good for our Maths., because we'll have to work 
things out," added Brian, with an air of cunning.
" Well, if you have to mend it, you probably won't break it."
" We'd be awfully careful with it, and then we could sell it for 
more than it cost us," said Jane.
" Yes, I know; I've heard all that before. But, anyway, when 
and where are you going to build it ? "
" We could use the shed at the end of the garden, and Wooders, 
the carpenter, could help us; he used to repair aeroplanes in the 
Air Force."
39

--- PAGE 52 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
" Yes, but who is going to pay for the machine ? It'll probably 
cost about a hundred and fifty pounds."
" Oh no; if you buy it finished it would. But you can buy the 
parts, ready to assemble, for about twenty-five to thirty pounds," 
Brian said.
" What is the machine like ? Is it any good ? " asked their 
father doubtfully.
" Oh yes, it's very small, but quite efficient, and very strong."
" Well, I don't think it is a good idea."
" Oh, but it is really. You do want us to be good at flying, 
don't you ? " Jane's tone was beseeching.
" Yes, but not in a rattletrap that you've built yourself."
" But it'll have a certificate of airworthiness, and be inspected 
by a proper inspector," said Brian.
66 Well, look, I'll make a bargain. I'll buy you the parts and 
pay Wooders to help you build it, on one condition, and that is, 
for the next two terms—your two last terms—you must each be in the 
first four in your class. If either of you are lower, or if Brian fails 
in his Cranwell entrance, or you fail in Matric., then I sell the 
machine at once, and I won't buy another one. Understand ? "
" Yes, thank you; you are an angel. We'll be top, anything you 
like. 
Come on, Brian, let's go and see Wooders."
" If you get the address of the builders, I'll write for the parts," 
added their father.
Brian ran off to get a copy of the Sailplane, which contained the 
advertisement, while Jane stood grinning at her father, who 
twiddled the knobs on the radio without a smile on his face.
Brian sailed down the banisters and positively threw the cutting 
at their father, then ran out of the house and down the lane, followed 
by Jane.
The parts arrived four days later, and were taken straight to the 
40

--- PAGE 53 ---
lS:i^ 
^
had started to assemble one wing (see page 43)

--- PAGE 54 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
shed, which had been swept out and fitted with a bench and tools. 
Wooders helped them unpack the huge parcel and lay out the parts. 
They stored the plywood sheets on planks across the roof.
The ribs had been made and finished and the spars were built 
up, but there was still a lot to be done, so, storing the cans of dope 
and varnish away in a corner, they spread themselves and the 
blue-prints all over the floor and started to work things out.
66 Let's start on a wing," said Brian.
" No, the fuselage is much more fun," argued Jane.
Wooders put in, " Why not start with the rudder, which is simple, 
till you have got your hand in ? "
So they started on the rudder.
At the week-ends they went over to the club, where they were 
allowed to fly the Kadet secondary.
The second Sunday was a good soaring day, and there were often 
fourteen new machines in the air together. The twins were still 
launched off the hill-top with the bungy, and watched with envy 
the people who were being winch-launched from the bottom.
The wind was square on the hill, so Jane decided to go and 
investigate the bowl. She made two or three tentative attempts, 
getting nearer every time. She had been warned of getting into 
the curl-over of the wind, just behind the bowl, through getting too 
far in before starting the turn out again.
While she was beating up and down, she saw the beautiful Adler 
launched. This was the first time that she had seen it fly since 
they had fetched it from Eastbourne. It climbed steeply on the 
invisible winch wire and sailed along the hill just beneath her, like 
an immense, mysterious bat. Jane thought it was the most beautiful 
thing she had ever seen.
She watched it finish the beat, and turn, rising fast above the
Kadet. As it neared the Bastion, it started to circle, large, lazy
D 
41

--- PAGE 55 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
circles, slowly becoming a mere spectre far behind the hill. Jane 
nearly ran into the two-seater watching it.
After half an hour she landed, for Brian was the next on the list.
When he had been launched, she went down to the winch, where 
they were calling for someone to come and chop.
Chopping on the winch, although always spoken of as a joke, 
was a very responsible job, the pilot's life depending on the man 
with the little axe, for if, when the pilot had gained the maximum 
height from the launch and pulled the release wire, nothing hap­ 
pened, as the ring had jammed (a very rare occurrence, but not 
entirely unknown), then the man with the axe had to sever the 
wire between the rollers on the winch. If he failed, the sailplane 
would still be attached to the winch, which would be still winding 
in the cable on the overrun, and the machine would be brought 
quickly to the ground. His only chance would be to fly round the 
winch in small circles and then slip in on one wing, and break that 
rather than anything else. It had never happened so far, and 
probably never would, but the realisation made Jane hope that 
she would never have to chop.
Brown was driving the winch. They watched the next machine 
being turned into wind, then a little yellow dot moved up and 
down beside it.
" One flag," said Jane, measuring the distance between the swing 
of her arm and the slithering cable. The engine roared, and clouds 
of blue haze surrounded them; the machine was almost above her; 
would he—could he—release that glittering wire ? 
She glanced at 
the driver's face, mouth tight shut and eyes screwed up as he stared 
into the sky. The next second seemed a hundred years, and then 
a flash of light ripped earthwards—it was free. Jane loosened the 
axe in her moist hand, the cable battered on the ground, sending 
up a streamer of dust, and rushed bouncing in past her feet. 
42

--- PAGE 56 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
Brown grinned. " I thought you'd have to cut that time," he 
said. 
" He left it very late; wanted to get as much height as possible, 
I suppose."
In the meantime, Wooders had been working very hard on the 
machine, having started to assemble one wing, leaving the rudder 
for the twins to finish.
They were very excited when they saw it, and worked without 
stopping until bedtime every day until the following week-end, 
when they had the wing finished and covered on one side. Jane 
had done the covering, as Brian thought it was girlish to fiddle 
with fabric, and Wooders was too busy, anyway.
Jane was getting quite good at putting in the fabric panels, 
doping the ribs and ply-covered main spar, pressing the fabric down 
hard into the sticky substance and waiting until it was dry, then 
repeating the same for the trailing edge and the next rib, then 
painting on a coat of dope and watching the whole panel grow 
smooth and taut; it was like making their models, only many 
times more thrilling. Dope was horrible stuff on the fingers, 
though—it formed an extra stiff skin, and was almost impossible 
to remove.
Sometimes, the whole job would have to be redone; if the fabric 
had been stretched more one way than another, it had a tendency 
to pull away from the ribs as it tightened, or to produce mysterious 
ripples from corner to corner.
On Wednesday Bill came over in BradwelPs old Bentley and gave 
them a hand. He was very enthusiastic, and spent the entire day 
building a jig for the fuselage and setting up the bulkheads. The 
fuselage had to be built upside-down, resting on the two straight 
top longerons, so Brian and Jane were not able to sit in the skeleton 
and admire themselves. They thought it a great honour that Bill, 
one of the most experienced members in the club, should come
43

--- PAGE 57 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
over and spend an entire day helping them, so they regaled him 
with a huge supper in return.
School started on the following Friday, and the twins felt terribly 
shut in after their wonderful holiday; but they settled down to work, 
in order to keep to their side of the bargain. Jane, at a day school, 
was able to get away to the club at week-ends, and work on the 
machine in the evenings. Brian was only able to get away on 
Sunday afternoons, and by special permission of his father was 
allowed to go over to the gliding club, where he would meet his 
sister and do as much flying as was possible in the time.
By half-term they were flying the Falcon intermediate machine, 
which was bigger and sturdier than the Kadet. It had swept-back 
wings, and looked like a little two-seater. It was very strong and 
could stand up to any amount of hard landings.
One afternoon, late in October, Jane was flying it and, not 
allowing for the very strong wind of the day, undershot the landing- 
ground. She could see the hedge ahead and knew that she would 
not be able to clear it, so dived straight at it, as she had been told 
to, and at the last moment tried to jump it, but was not going quite 
fast enough. The speed dropped off as she tried to hop over and 
amid a loud rustling she sat heavily on the middle of the hedge. 
The Falcon had several rents in the fabric, and also some damaged 
leading edge plywood. But Jane was quite unharmed save for a 
large thorn which had found its way through the bottom of the 
machine.
And so it went on; they gradually became more sure of themselves 
in the air, and flew the Falcon in great style. And soon the great 
day came when they were allowed to fly the Grunau Baby, the best 
but one sailplane that the club possessed, down from the top. 
Then, a week later, soar it. After the Falcon it was a lovely machine, 
light and sensitive to handle, and with a very good performance.
44

--- PAGE 58 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
They flew it as much as possible until they had done the hours 
necessary before attempting a winch launch, which they were able 
to do two days before Christmas.
Brian tried it first. It was the same as they had done in the two- 
seater, only much more fun alone. The G.B. was turned facing 
the wind and the winch, which was on the far side of the landing- 
ground. The cable was unwound from the winch drum and drawn 
across the landing-ground up to the machine, where it was fixed into 
the quick-release hook in the sailplane's nose. Brian was ready in the 
machine, his left hand tightly gripping the release ring, his right 
holding the stick.
The cable was tightened, then the second flag waved, and he was 
pulled rapidly into the air. Leaving the ground, he pulled the 
stick almost hard back and sailed upwards. The angle was very 
steep, but Brian was much too busy and interested to be frightened 
by this method of launching. In fact, he enjoyed it. When almost 
above the winch he lowered the nose to normal position and 
" pulled the plug," as releasing was normally called. He felt the 
wire fall away, then, free in the air, he floated along above the hill.
As winter drew on, the Hi7 in the shed at home grew and 
developed. At the club they made many friends, people who were 
more than mere companions and acquaintances—they were friends 
who made the sport of gliding worth-while, friends who, with their 
generosity, cheerfulness, and unselfishness, had made gliding what 
it was. And at school their work improved; no one was going to 
have that Hi7. It was theirs. The way to the love of their 
life—flying.
45

--- PAGE 59 ---
CHAPTER VII
Five Hours
A HIS party to-night should be rather fun. What are you 
wearing ? " said Jane.
" Ah, Fm going to make my face up so you won't recognise me 
—I'm going to be a first-class tramp," Brian replied.
" You are already. But it certainly is going to be great fun not 
having to be clean and tidy. A tramps' party's a great idea."
" Well, let's help get these machines into the hangar, and then 
go and change."
It was New Year's Eve, and the celebration at the club was to 
be in the form of a tramps' party, in which everyone would dress 
up in their oldest clothes and dirty their faces with burnt cork. 
Nearly all the members were staying at the club that night, and 
the bunkhouse was crowded out.
There was a band and a certain amount of dancing and streamer- 
throwing. Others, including Brian, were trying to outdo each 
other with feats of strength and agility and other well-known tricks. 
A minority were just sitting, talking gliding—the endless subject— 
working out new theories and exploding old ones.
There was a great deal of noise, and it was a very good party, 
and it was well on to three in the morning before everyone had 
made the wild dash across the slippery chalk ground to the bunk- 
house in the gently falling snow, tripping over trailer tow-bars in 
the dark.
A little earlier Jane had announced her intention of trying for 
the Silver C duration, a flight of five hours, the following morning.
46

--- PAGE 60 ---
SILENT FLIGHT
Several people had laughed, telling her not to be too ambitious; 
others had pointed out that the wind was south, not west. But she 
was determined, and somehow felt that the wind would be west by 
the morning, and a few people whom she had quietly asked to help 
had promised to launch her.
It was 4 a.m. before the last people had got to bed and stopped 
talking, and the three other girls in their